TWENTY SIX TWENTY TWENTY
TWO MEETING OF THE INDEPENDENT
COMMUNITY POLICE OVERSIGHT
COMMISSION TO ORDER MISOGYNOUS
COULD YOU DO THE ROLL CALL FOR
SHAUN COMMISSIONER BONNIE
BILLUPS COMMISSIONER MACCI SHIP
PRESIDENT COUNCIL MEMBER WELL
MALAWI COUNCIL MEMBER LANCE
SONG HERE COMMISSIONER JUDE
WALTON HERE SHE LISA JACKSON
COMMISSIONER STEPHANIE CUTTER
IS ABSENT TODAY COMMISSIONER
MOHAMED OFMAN PRESENT VICE
CHAIR FRANCIS HARGRAVES PRESENT
COMMISSIONER RANDY MILGROM
PRESENT COMMISSIONER SYNTHIA
HARRISON ABSOLUTELY CAJOLES
COMMISSIONER JOSHUA MIZER WE
HAVE A QUORUM.
THANK YOU.
IN TERMS OF THE APPROVAL OF THE
AGENDA, ARE THERE ANY
AMENDMENTS TO IT OR IS THERE A
MOTION TO APPROVE IT AS IS?
DO WE NEED TO DO WE NEED TO ADD
A BUNCH OF DISCUSSION ON THAT?
&gt;&gt; FOR INSTANCE, I THINK WE CAN
YEAH.
&gt;&gt; SO I&apos;D LIKE TO MAKE A MOTION
TO ADD A BUDGET DISCUSSION, A
DISCUSSION ON THE POLICE
BUDGET.
IS THERE A SECOND IN FAVOR?
I OPPOSED OK SO WE CAN ADD THAT
TO NEW BUSINESS.
IS THERE A MOTION THEN TO
APPROVE THE AGENDA WITH THAT
ADDITION MOTION TO APPROVE THE
AGENDA?
&gt;&gt; IS THERE A SECOND OR SECOND
ALL IN FAVOR?
&gt;&gt; I OPPOSED ALL RIGHT.
NOW WE HAVE COME YOU ARE NOW
WE&apos;VE COME TO THE TIME FOR A
PUBLIC FORUM AND THAT MEANS
THAT NEW MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC
WHO ARE HERE, OUR ONLINE
COLLEAGUE AND CAN COME AND
SPEAK TO US FOR THREE MINUTES
COME ON.
AND YOU CAN SAY WHO YOU ARE IF
YOU LIKE.
&gt;&gt; MY NAME IS TEACHER BERTEN.
I CURRENTLY LIVE IN WARD FOUR.
I ALREADY HAVE THREE MINUTES SO
YOU DON&apos;T HAVE TO CONFIRM OR
BUZZ ME PLEASE.
HELLO.
OVER A YEAR AGO I REQUESTED THE
RELEASE OF THE ANTARIA POLICE
DEPARTMENT&apos;S POLICIES AND
PROCEDURES WITH REASONABLE
EXCEPTIONS FOR PUBLICLY
ACCESSIBLE VIEWING.
MY REQUEST WAS DENIED AND
THROUGH APPEALING THE DENIAL.
FORTY TWO POLICIES WERE
RELEASED AS PUBLIC DOCUMENTS
AND A FEE OF SEVEN HUNDRED
EIGHTY SIX DOLLARS IN NINETEEN
POINT SEVEN HOURS WOULD BE
REQUIRED TO REVIEW AND RELEASE
THE REMAINING POLICIES TO THE
PUBLIC.
IT WAS CONFIRMED CITY
REPRESENTATIVES THAT UNRELATED
TO FOIA REQUESTS THE CHIEF
OF POLICE WAS GOING
TO START
AUGUST TWENTY TWENTY ONE THE
RELEASE OF TEN TO TWENTY
POLICIES THE POLICE DEPARTMENT
ON THEIR WEBSITE FOR PUBLICLY
ACCESSIBLE VIEWING.
THE ATLANTA POLICE DEPARTMENT
HAS FAILED TO MEET THEIR SELF
SET TIME FRAME BY MULTIPLE
ATTEMPTS TO GET AN UPDATED TIME
FRAME OR A VALID REASON WHY
POLICIES ALREADY RELEASED TO
THE PUBLIC HAVE NOT BEEN ADDED
ON TO THE POLICE DEPARTMENT
WEBSITE HAVE NOT COME TO ANY
SORT OF FRUITION OR RESOLUTION.
THE AVERAGE RELEASE OF POLICIES
BY THE POLICE IS LESS THAN
EIGHT POLICIES PER MONTH WHICH
AT ITS CURRENT RATE WILL TAKE
OVER FOUR YEARS TO FULFILL
ADJUSTING TO MATCH THE CURRENT
RATE OF RELEASE IN TWENTY
TWENTY TWO WOULD RESULT IN THE
PROCESS TAKING OVER FIFTEEN
YEARS TO COMPLETE THE ONLY
POLICY RELEASED IN THE LAST TWO
MONTHS WAS THE ONE I
SPECIFICALLY STATED IN THE
PUBLIC FORUM SECTION OF THE
CITY COUNCIL MEETING OF ANN
ARBOR SOMETHING LIKE MULTIPLE
MONTH LONG EMAILS WITH THE
HANOVER POLICE DEPARTMENT.
MY CITY WAS NOT ABLE TO
ACCOMPLISH THE RESPONSES I
RECEIVE RANGE FROM THERE IS NO
SET TIME FRAME.
THE CHIEF OF POLICE WILL
RELEASE THEM WHEN HE DEEMS IT
CORRECT AND MY FAVORITE ROLE IS
BEING TOLD THE POLICIES ARE ALL
POSTED AND I&apos;M SENT A LINK TO
THE POLICE DEPARTMENT WEBSITE A
SIMPLE ACCOUNT OF THE POLICIES
LISTED IN THE LINK I KEEP
GETTING SENT WOULD PROVE IN
FACT THAT ALL THE POLICIES ARE
NOT POSTED.
BUT GETTING A CITY MEMBER A
CITY EMPLOYEE TO RESPOND AFTER
POINTING THIS OUT IS SOMETHING
I&apos;M ALSO NOT ABLE TO
ACCOMPLISH.
THE ASSISTANT CHIEF OF POLICE
TOLD ME I NEEDED TO SPEAK WITH
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR ABOUT
THIS BUT WHEN TRYING TO DO SO
I&apos;M DENIED A MEETING OR EVEN
THE OPTION OF MAKING AN
APPOINTMENT AND THEN I&apos;M
FOLLOWED AROUND BY TWO TO FOUR
AND OTHER POLICE OFFICERS
DEPENDING ON WHICH TIME I&apos;VE
TRIED TO SPEAK OR MAKE AN
APPOINTMENT WITH A
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE CITY.
I&apos;VE ALSO BEEN TOLD I NEED TO
FILE A POLICE REPORT IN ORDER
TO GAIN THE POTENTIAL ABILITY
TO SPEAK WITH THE UNIVERSITY
ADMINISTRATOR.
EVERY RESPONSE I&apos;VE RECEIVED
FROM MY CITY HAS BEEN DESIGNED
TO DENY, DELAY AND DEFLECT THE
RESPONSIBILITY OF ACTION.
IT&apos;S LIKE ASKING WHAT TWO PLUS
TWO IS AND THE ONLY RESPONSE
GIVEN IS THAT FIVE THE PRIME
NUMBER A WHOLE NUMBER IN THE
SQUARE ROOT OF TWENTY FIVE
THOSE ARE ALL VALID FACTS FIVE
BUT THAT DOES NOT MAKE FIVE A
VALID ANSWER FOR WHAT TWO PLUS
TWO IS.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M ASKING THIS COMMITTEE TO
OBTAIN A QUANTIFIABLE AND
MEASURABLE TIME FRAME FROM THE
ALBERTA POLICE DEPARTMENT FOR
THEIR RELEASE THE POSTING
OF THE ANN ARBOR POLICE
DEPARTMENT&apos;S POLICIES ON THEIR
WEBSITE AND CLEARLY DEFINE THE
PUNITIVE ACTIONS THAT WILL BE
TAKEN IF AND WHEN THE AND OUR
POLICE DEPARTMENT FAILS AGAIN
TO MEET AND FULFILL THE SET
TIME FRAME OF POSTING AND
RELEASING THEIR POLICIES ON
THEIR WEBSITE, THEY CAN START
WITH THE REMAINING FORTY TWO
POLICIES MADE PUBLIC DOCUMENTS
OVER A YEAR AGO BUT STILL HAVE
NOT BEEN POSTED ON THE ANN
ARBOR POLICE WEBSITE.
FOR EXAMPLE, POLICIES ZERO ZERO
ONE ZERO ONE ZERO.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME.
THANK YOU
.
HELLO HELLO I&apos;M LIBBY HUNTER.
IN LIGHT OF ANOTHER WHITE
OFFICER SHOOTING DEAD A BLACK
PERSON IN GRAND RAPIDS ANN
ARBOR SHOULD NOT FORGET HOWEVER
THAT A WHITE OFFICER ALSO SHOT
DEAD A BLACK PERSON HERE IN OUR
CITY AFTER HE MURDERED OR A
ROSSER DAVID REED, THE OFFICER
WAS ELEVATED TO HIGHER OFFICE
IN THE APD AND GIVEN A PAY
RAISE UNDER MAYOR CHRISTOPHER
TAYLOR AND HIS ADMINISTRATION.
JUSTICE HAS MOST DEFINITELY NOT
BEEN SERVED IN THIS CASE.
I AM ASKING MAYOR TAYLOR TO DO
WHAT CIVIL RIGHTS ACTIVISTS
HAVE DEMANDED OVER AND OVER
AGAIN.
PARDON MY MASK APOL OJAI&apos;S TO
THE FAMILY OF AURORA, SIR.
PAY HER FUNERAL COSTS AND PAY
SOME FINANCIAL RESTITUTION TO
HER CHILDREN.
MAYOR TAYLOR, WHY IS SO
DIFFICULT FOR A CITY LIKE ANN
ARBOR TO SERVE JUSTICE TO ITS
RESIDENTS?
THIS IS AFFECTING EVERYONE AND
IT HAS BEEN FOR A NUMBER
OF YEARS NOW SINCE THIS WAS
CARRIED OUT AND I BELIEVE
OFFICER DAVID REED IS STILL IN
OUR DEPARTMENT IN A HIGHER
OFFICE IN THE DEPARTMENT.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU, OFFICER.
NO, WE DON&apos;T HAVE ANY PRESENT.
OK, IS THERE A DISCUSSION
OF THE MARCH MEETING MINUTES OR
IS THERE A MOTION TO APPROVE
THE MOTION TO APPROVE THE
MINUTES OF OUR MEETING?
IS THERE A SECOND SECOND
ELEVATOR?
&gt;&gt; I AND YOUR POST?
RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
SO WE HAVE SOME OLD BUSINESS TO
TAKE CARE OF AND WE HAVE A
RESOLUTION TO SEND TO COUNCIL
REGARDING THE ON OUR PUBLIC
SAFETY RESPONSE PROGRAM AND I
WANTED TO POINT OUT A COUPLE
OF THINGS BEFORE WE GET INTO
IT.
FIRST, THE ARAB RESPONSE
PROGRAM THAT IS UNDER
CONSIDERATION FROM THE CITY IS
IN ADDITION TO EXISTING PUBLIC
SERVICES THAT THE APD ARE
ALREADY PROVIDING THE RESPONSE
PROGRAM DOES NOT REPLACE ANY
PROGRAM IS JUST AN ADDITIONAL
TOOL THAT WILL BE AVAILABLE FOR
THOSE CITIZENS WHO WOULD PREFER
OR WORKERS OR VISITORS WHO
PREFER TO HAVE AN UNARMED
RESPONSE AND THE RESOLUTION IN
FRONT OF US IS JUST FROM OUR
POSITION ASKING COUNCIL TO MAKE
SURE THAT THAT UNARMED RESPONSE
PROGRAM IS NOT LED BY A LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.
THAT IS NOT TO SAY THAT THERE
WOULD BE NO COOPERATION WITH
EXISTING LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCIES.
IT IS CERTAINLY POSSIBLE THAT
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY COULD
REFER CALLS TO THAT.
OUR RESPONSE AND IT IS
CERTAINLY POSSIBLE ALTHOUGH
HIGHLY UNEXPECTED THAT ON&apos;EM
RESPONSE PLAN COULD CALL THE
POLICE.
&gt;&gt; KAHOOTZ IN EUGENE, OREGON ON
THAT POINT SIX PERCENT OF THE
TIME, LESS THAN ONE PERCENT
OF THE TIME THEY INVOLVE
POLICE.
BUT WE UNDERSTAND THAT&apos;S A
POSSIBILITY.
SO WE EXPECT THAT THERE COULD
BE COMMUNICATION AND
COOPERATION BETWEEN THE OUR
RESPONSE AND ANY LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES INVOLVED
IN THE AREA.
BUT THIS RESOLUTION IS ASKING
THAT THE UNKNOWN RESPONSE PLAN
NOT BE OPERATED BY A LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY AND ALTHOUGH
IT MIGHT SEEM OBVIOUS TO
MEMBERS OF THE COMMISSION THAT
HAS LARGELY TO DO WITH THE
PHILOSOPHIES OF LAW ENFORCEMENT
AS OPPOSED TO BEHAVIORAL HEALTH
AGENCIES AND THOSE WHO MIGHT
FULFILL THAT MISSION.
&gt;&gt; SO THEY MAY LOOK AT HANDLING
THE SAME SITUATION VERY
DIFFERENTLY AND WE BELIEVE THAT
THE RESPONSE PROGRAM WOULD BE
BETTER SERVED BY AN OPERATION
THAT DOES NOT HAVE A LAW
ENFORCEMENT PERSPECTIVE.
&gt;&gt; SO YOU ALL HAVE THE
RESOLUTION IN FRONT OF YOU AND
TO SAY THERE CERTAINLY IS NO ON
OUR RESPONSE PROGRAM AT THIS
TIME THE CITY IS ABOUT TO START
DOING COMMUNITY OUTREACH.
THEY&apos;LL BE SURVEYING PEOPLE ALL
ACROSS THE COMMUNITY, PEOPLE
WHO LIVE, WORK AND VISIT HERE
ABOUT WHAT THEY WOULD LIKE TO
SEE SOMETIME AFTER THAT THEY
WOULD DEVELOP A REQUEST FOR
PROPOSALS TO STAFF THAT AND
THEN AN AGENCY WILL BE
DESIGNATED TO RUN THAT PROGRAM
OR AGENCIES WHO KNOWS.
THIS HOWEVER IS JUST ASKING
COUNCIL TO MAKE SURE THAT WHEN
THAT PROPOSAL IS GRANTED THAT
IT IS NOT GRANTED TO A LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY.
&gt;&gt; &gt;&gt; I DON&apos;T SOME OF YOU HAVE
GIVEN COMMENTS ALREADY.
ARE THERE ANY DISHES
SUGGESTIONS, COMMENTS THAT
SHOULD I READ IT?
&gt;&gt; YOU GUYS ARE GOOD.
YOU DON&apos;T NEED ME TO READ BUT
I&apos;M LOOKING IT OVER.
&gt;&gt; IS THERE ANYTHING ELSE THAT
SHOULD BE ADDED THAT IS NOT
HERE?
THERE ARE JUST THREE RESOLVE
CLAUSES THAT THE ORGANIZATION
LEADING RESPONSE WILL OPERATE
INDEPENDENTLY FROM LAW
ENFORCEMENT AND WILL NOT ADOPT
A COLORISTS MODEL.
THE SECOND RESULT CAUSES OF THE
DEVELOPMENT OF OUR RESPONSE.
&gt;&gt; WE BE GUIDED BY PEOPLE FROM
COMMUNITIES WHO ARE
DISPROPORTIONATELY POLICED AND
THE THIRD RESOLVE CLAUSES THAT
THE STORM RESPONSE PROGRAM
SHOULD INCLUDE LINKAGES TO A
WIDE TO A RANGE OF SOCIAL
SERVICES COMPANIES, VARIOUS
SOCIAL DETERMINANTS OF HEALTH
AND WELL-BEING SUCH AS MENTAL
HEALTH, SUBSTANCE USE,
TRANSPORTATION, CONFLICT
RESOLUTION, HOUSING AND THE
WHEREAS CLAUSES ARE REALLY JUST
THE RATIONALE FOR MAKING THAT
REQUEST LOOKING AT IT NOW, THE
ONLY THING I&apos;M WONDERING ABOUT
IS IF THERE NEEDS TO BE A WORD
IN FRONT OF GUIDED IN THE
SECOND RESOLVE SIGNIFICANTLY
MEANINGFULLY SOMETHING LIKE
THAT BECAUSE YOU COULD SAY YOU
KNOW WHAT WE HAVE REACHED AND
WE SPOKE SOMEBODY FOR HALF AN
HOUR THAT GUIDED US BUT
ACTUALLY REALLY GETTING TO WHAT
I THINK THE INTENT IS THAT A
LOT OF THE CONTENT IS REALLY
KIND OF DRIVEN.
&gt;&gt; SO YOUR SUGGESTIONS ARE
ADDING MEANINGFULLY GUIDED OR
SIGNIFICANTLY OR SUBSTANTIALLY
OR SUBSTANTIVE.
YEAH, JUST SOMETHING THAT KIND
OF UNDERLINES BEFORE THE WORD
GUIDED.
&gt;&gt; YES, ANYBODY IS OK WITH THAT
.
SO WHICH ONE DO YOU LIKE WHICH
WHICH ADVERB SUBSTANTIVELY
SIGNIFICANTLY WORDS WORDSMITH I
THINK SUBSTANTIVELY IS THE
BETTER CHOICE.
OK GOT IT.
AND I ALSO HAVE A QUESTION I
ASKED THIS BEFORE I KNOW WE
DISCUSSED I AGREE WITH THIS
WITH THIS RESOLUTION I&apos;M
PREPARED TO TO VOTE IN FAVOR
OF IT I GUESS I GUESS I AM
AWARE THOUGH THAT THERE ARE
OTHER SOME OTHER COMMISSIONS
HAVE ALSO ADOPTED SOMETHING
SIMILAR AND WE DON&apos;T NOT YET
KNOW THEY HAVEN&apos;T YET NO.
OK ON
THE HUMAN RIGHTS
COMMISSION IS LOOKING AT IT AND
I BELIEVE THE HOUSING
COMMISSION IS LOOKING AT IT AS
WELL BUT THEY HAVE NOT YET ARE
YOU OR ARE WE AS A COMMISSION
AWARE OF WHAT THE TRIP LOOK
LIKE LOOKS LIKE I DON&apos;T THINK
WE NEED TO BE, YOU KNOW, GUIDED
BY THEM.
I WERE DRAFTING HER OWN I GUESS
MY ONLY QUESTION WOULD BE
CURIOUS WHETHER WE COULD BE IN
THE POSITION OF ADOPTING A
RESOLUTION THAT COULD CONFLICT
WITH OTHERS.
AT THIS POINT IT DOES NOT LOOK
LIKE THERE WILL BE A CONFLICT
THOUGH THAT HUMAN RIGHTS
COMMISSION&apos;S DRAFT FROM WHICH
THEY&apos;RE WORKING IS THIS ONE.
SO I WOULD LET THEM KNOW THAT
WE ADDED THE WORD SUBSTANTIVELY
AND OUR GOAL IS ALWAYS TO HAVE
ALL OF OUR RESOLVE CLAUSES THE
SAME SO THAT YOU KNOW, ANYBODY
WHO HAS TO IMPLEMENT THIS WOULD
NOT HAVE TO MATCH UP DIFFERENT
THINGS AND RESOLVE CONFLICTS
AND THE HOUSING COMMISSION MAY
JUST DOING A RESOLUTION TO
ENDORSE THIS ONE SO THEY MAY GO
THAT ROUTE.
THERE HAVE BEEN CONVERSATIONS
ABOUT DOING THAT BUT THEY HAVE
NOT YET DECIDED AND HUMAN
RIGHTS WILL TAKE THIS UP UNTIL
MAY BECAUSE I THINK THAT OUR
MEETING THIS MONTH OR ACTUALLY
WE&apos;RE AT THE END OF THE MONTH
SO THEY DID NOT MEET THIS MONTH
BUT WE SHOULD NOT BE IN
CONFLICT OK THIS YEAR DO WE
NEED TO PUT ANYTHING IN HERE
ABOUT HOW THE PROGRAM IS GOING
TO GET ROLLED OUT?
I KNOW THERE&apos;S QUESTIONS ABOUT
HOW THE PUBLIC IS GOING TO
RECEIVE EDUCATION ON
UNDERSTANDING WHAT THE WHAT THE
PROCESS WILL BE IF IT&apos;LL BE A
NEW NUMBER OR WHO THEY HOW THEY
REACH THESE INDIVIDUALS IN THIS
IN THESE CASES I FEEL LIKE THAT
WOULD BE A SEPARATE RESOLUTION
THAT AFTER WE KNEW WHAT WAS
GOING TO HAPPEN THEN WE MIGHT
COMMENT ON HOW WE&apos;D LIKE TO SEE
IT HAPPEN.
&gt;&gt; BUT I THINK GETTING INTO THE
NUTS AND BOLTS OF THAT AT THIS
POINT MIGHT NOT BE THAT
REALISTIC.
MIGHT WE MIGHT BE A LITTLE BIT
AHEAD OF EVERYONE ELSE ON THAT,
ALTHOUGH THAT&apos;S NOT A PROBLEM
IN ITSELF.
&gt;&gt; BUT I THINK WE CERTAINLY
HAVE THE EXPECTATION THAT THERE
WOULD BE A PUBLIC EDUCATION
CAMPAIGN TO SAY HEY, THIS IS AN
ADDITIONAL RESOURCE.
&gt;&gt; THE DETERMINATION OF WHETHER
THERE WOULD BE A SEPARATE
NUMBER OR NOT I THINK CITY
ADMINISTRATOR TONY TALKED ABOUT
THAT IN FEBRUARY AND SAID THAT
THAT IT WOULD BE SMARTER TO
HAVE A SEPARATE NUMBER.
CERTAINLY THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO
BELIEVE THAT BECAUSE OF THE WAY
THAT INFORMATION IS TRACKED
THROUGH 9/11 ONE THAT THAT
WOULD BE CHALLENGING TO HAVE IT
RUN THROUGH NINE ONE ONE I
THINK CHIEF COX WAS IN THE
OBSERVER I THINK IT WAS
YESTERDAY I DON&apos;T REMEMBER I
READ THAT BUT I DON&apos;T REMEMBER
THE DATE.
&gt;&gt; SORRY INDICATING THAT, YOU
KNOW, HAVING A SEPARATE NUMBER
WOULD PROVIDE AN ADDITIONAL
RESOURCE BUT CERTAINLY
PUBLICIZING THAT AND MAKING
SURE THE PUBLIC IS AWARE OF IT
AS AN ADDITIONAL RESOURCE WOULD
BE KEY.
THANK YOU.
OF COURSE
AS A MEMBER OF LOWIE.
THANK YOU.
THE FIRST RESULT CLAUS FROM THE
END SAYS THAT THIS WILL NOT
ADOPT A RESPONSIVE MODEL SO
THAT I HAD BETTER UNDERSTAND
THAT THIS CALLING FOR THAT THE
MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONALS
WOULD NOT HAVE UH, POLICE OR
SWORN OFFICERS WITH THEM IN
RESPONSE THAT THEY WOULD BE
RESPONDING TO INSTANCES WITHOUT
SWORN OFFICERS.
&gt;&gt; ABSOLUTELY.
AND SO THAT&apos;S SORT OF AT THE
HEART OF WHAT AN UNARMED
RESPONSE MEANS.
IT MEANS THAT IF YOU CALL THAT
NUMBER YOU SHOULD NOT EXPECT TO
GET LAW ENFORCEMENT.
SO YOU&apos;RE CALLING THAT NUMBER
BECAUSE YOU DON&apos;T WANT LAW
ENFORCEMENT.
&gt;&gt; IF YOU WOULD WANT LAW
ENFORCEMENT YOU WOULD CALL NINE
ONE ONE AND HAS HAS THE BODY
BEEN ABLE TO GET THIS BODY
BEING ABLE TO GET FEEDBACK FROM
THE COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTH
PROFESSIONALS IN THE
WILLINGNESS THE COMFORT OF
OF OF FOLKS WHO DO RESPOND TO
THESE CALLS JUST TRYING TO GET
A TEMPERATURE AS TO COMMUNITY
MENTAL HEALTH IS THERE
ABSOLUTELY IN FAVOR OF LOCAL
RESPONSE AND THEY LIKE BEING
EMBEDDED WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT.
THEY&apos;VE BEEN VERY CLEAR ABOUT
THAT.
SO THEY HAVE NO INTENTION.
YOU KNOW, THERE ARE TIMES WHEN
THEY MAY NOT RESPOND WITH LAW
ENFORCEMENT BUT THEY ABSOLUTELY
INTEND TO KEEP DOING THAT.
&gt;&gt; SO COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTH
PERSONNEL WOULD NOT BE ENGAGED
IN AN ARMED RESPONSE PLAN
BECAUSE THAT&apos;S NOT THEIR
PHILOSOPHY.
THEY&apos;VE BEEN VERY CLEAR THAT
THEY WANT TO RESPOND WITH LAW
ENFORCEMENT.
&gt;&gt; WELL, THANKS FOR THE COURSE
THE BRIGHT LINES.
I&apos;M JUST MAKING SURE THAT I
COMPLETELY UNDERSTANDS.
&gt;&gt; YEAH.
AND THERE ARE LOTS
OF PROFESSIONALS ALL AROUND THE
COUNTRY IN DETROIT AND AT OTHER
PLACES AND LIKELY HERE WHO ARE
WILLING TO DO AN ARMED RESPONSE
WITHOUT BEING ACCOMPANIED BY
LAW ENFORCEMENT.
THEY TRAINED FOR THAT.
THEY GO TO SCHOOL FOR THAT AND
THEY PRACTICE LIKE THAT.
SO THERE ARE DIFFERENT
POPULATIONS OF BEHAVIORAL
HEALTH SPECIALISTS AND THEY
HAVE DIFFERENT ORIENTATIONS AND
THERE ARE THOSE WHO PREFER TO
WORK IN THE COMMUNITY WITHOUT
LAW ENFORCEMENT AND SO WE DON&apos;T
EXPECT THAT WE WILL NOT BE ABLE
TO FIND PEOPLE TO DO THAT.
BUT WE WOULD NOT LIKELY FIND
PEOPLE WHO ARE USED TO GOING
OUT WITH POLICE WHO SUDDENLY
WOULD LIKE TO NOT GO OUT WITH
POLICE BECAUSE THERE&apos;S PROBABLY
A REASON WHY YOU PREFER TO GO
WITH POLICE IF YOU&apos;RE NOT SO
COMFORTABLE WITH THE POPULATION
YOU&apos;RE SERVING, FOR EXAMPLE OR
FOR WHATEVER REASON I CERTAINLY
WOULDN&apos;T WANT TO SPEAK FOR OUR
COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTH
QUESTIONS ANY OTHER QUESTIONS,
COMMENTS, THOUGHTS SHOULD WE DO
READ NOW THE YES, ABSOLUTELY.
&gt;&gt; SO THE SECOND AS A RESULT
HAS BEEN REVISED TO SAY THAT
RESOLVER THAT THE DEVELOPMENT
OF AN UNARMED RESPONSE PROGRAM
WILL BE SUBSTANTIVE GUIDED BY
PEOPLE FROM COMMUNITIES WHO ARE
DISPROPORTIONATELY POLICED SUCH
AS THOSE WHO USE DRUGS, ARE
WITHOUT HOUSING, HAVE MENTAL
HEALTH ISSUES OR ARE BLACK,
LATINO OR OTHER PEOPLE OF COLOR
.
I WONDER IF IS IF IT&apos;D BE
USEFUL IN THAT SAME CLASS AS WE
ARE LISTING DEMOGRAPHICS
OF PEOPLE TO TALK ABOUT SOCIO
ECONOMIC STATUS
SO THERE IS A
PHRASE ALICE THAT STANDS FOR
ASSET LIMITED INCOME
CONSTRAINED EMPLOYED PEOPLE AND
IN THE STATE OF MICHIGAN ABOUT
13 PERCENT OF PEOPLE LIVE BELOW
THE POVERTY LINE.
BUT TWENTY SIX PERCENT
OF PEOPLE FIT INTO THE CATEGORY
OF ALICE AND THOSE ARE PEOPLE
WHO ARE INCOME CONSTRAINED BUT
ARE EMPLOYED AND MAY OFTEN BE
LIVING IN SITUATIONS WHERE THEY
ARE OVERPOLICED.
AND SO I WONDER IF SS MIGHT BE
A THING THAT WE MIGHT CONSIDER
TO SAY SOMETHING ABOUT PEOPLE
IN POVERTY OR WHO FIT INTO THE
CATEGORY OF ALICE THOUGHTS
WHICH I THINK CAN BE ADDED OK
THE ANYBODY HAVE AN OBJECTION
TO THAT?
&gt;&gt; YOU GUYS GO WITH THAT OK OK
I&apos;LL TRY ONE MORE TIME I&apos;LL
READ IT AGAIN.
&gt;&gt; RESOLVED THAT THE
DEVELOPMENT OF UNARM RESPONSE
PROGRAM WILL BE SUBSTANTIVELY
GUIDED BY PEOPLE FROM
COMMUNITIES WHO ARE
DISPROPORTIONATELY POLICED SUCH
AS THOSE WHO USE DRUGS ARE
WITHOUT HOUSING, HAVE MENTAL
HEALTH ISSUES, ARE IN POVERTY
OR ALICE OR ARE BLACK, LATINO
OR OTHER PEOPLE OF COLOR MIGHT
HAVE TO DEFINE WHAT POLICIES
MIGHT HAVE TO DEFINE WHAT
ALLISS SPELL IT OUT AND THEN
I&apos;LL USE THE ACRONYM INFERENCE
I ACTUALLY WROTE IT LIKE THAT
SORRY.
&gt;&gt; SO ASSET LIMITED INCOME
CONSTRAINED EMPLOYED BECAUSE
THAT&apos;S ACTUALLY IN WASHTENAW
COUNTY.
I THINK THE FIGURE IS LIKE
TWENTY SEVEN PERCENT OF PEOPLE
FIT INTO THOSE TWO CATEGORIES.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S PROBABLY LOWER IN THE
CITY THAN ARBOR RIGHT, RIGHT.
I ONLY SAW DATA FOR THE COUNTY
IN THE STATE I DIDN&apos;T SEE I&apos;M
NOT SURE IF I&apos;VE SEEN ANN ARBOR
DATA BUT I&apos;M SURE THAT NUMBER
IS MUCH LOWER IN THE CITY.
&gt;&gt; BUT WE ARE ONE OF THE MOST,
YOU KNOW, SORT OF DISPARATE
COUNTIES IN THE U.S. I&apos;M SORRY
COMMISSIONER MILGROM KNOW THIS.
&gt;&gt; I WAS JUST CURIOUS.
&gt;&gt; SO YOU ARE TALKING ABOUT
ADDING THAT AT THE VERY END
AFTER IT COULD GO WITHOUT AFTER
WITHOUT HOUSING COMMA.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S WHAT I WAS GOING TO
SUGGEST.
OK, PERFECT.
&gt;&gt; SO WOULD GO WITH IT WOULD GO
AFTER HER WITHOUT HOUSING IN
POVERTY POVERTY OR ASSET
LIMITED INCOME CONSTRAINED
EMPLOYED IN PARENTHESIS.
WE DON&apos;T ACTUALLY HAVE TO SAY
ALICE BECAUSE WE WON&apos;T USE IT
AGAIN COMMA HAVE MENTAL HEALTH
ISSUES OR OUR BLACK LATINO OR
OTHER PEOPLE OF COLOR.
OK THANK YOU FOR THAT
.
ANY OTHER THOUGHTS COMMENTS OR
IS THERE A MOTION TO APPROVE IT
AS AMENDED A MOVE TO APPROVE
THIS RESOLUTION?
&gt;&gt; LANE, WERE YOU ASKING A
QUESTION
?
&gt;&gt; I HAVE A QUICK QUESTION.
SO IS THE INTENT OF THE
RESOLUTION TO INFORM THE RFP
PROCESS FOR COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT ONE MORE TIME?
&gt;&gt; IS THE IS THE INTENT OF THE
RESOLUTION TO INFORM THE RFP
PROCESS COMMUNION&apos;S EASEMENT
THE RFP FOR THE ACTUAL ITEM
RESPONSE WHICH ISN&apos;T OUT YET.
&gt;&gt; CORRECT.
WE JUST WANTED TO GET AHEAD
OF THAT ONE.
&gt;&gt; OK IS IT IS THE STANDARD
THAT COMMISSIONS CRAFT THE
PROGRAM A PROGRAM BEFORE AN RFP
IS ISSUED?
I DON&apos;T THINK SO.
I DON&apos;T THINK IT&apos;S STANDARD.
I THINK WHAT WE&apos;D LIKE TO SAY
TO COUNCIL THOUGH IS BEFORE
IT&apos;S CRAFTED AND THAT STAFF ARE
AWARE THAT THE EXPECTATION
OF THIS COMMISSION IS THAT IT
NOT BE DESIGNED AS A RESPONSE
PROCESS.
&gt;&gt; OK, I MEAN WE UNDERSTAND
THAT YOU KNOW, STAFF CAN
LARGELY IGNORE THAT IF THEY
WANT.
&gt;&gt; I GUESS I&apos;M JUST TRYING TO
UNDERSTAND LIKE WHERE WHERE
THIS WOULD COME IN THE PROCESS
LIKE WHERE DOES IT COME WHERE
WHERE WHERE DOES THE CITY
REPORT BACK?
YOU KNOW, LIKE DO WHAT WE SEE
THE IMPLEMENTATION WHEN THE
WHEN THE PROGRAM IS UP AND
RUNNING AND THEN WE KNOW OR
LIKE WHERE IS IT IN THIS LOOP
OF CONVERSATIONS BETWEEN
COMMISSIONS AND STAFF AND
ELECTED?
DO WE KNOW THAT THIS WILL WE&apos;RE
HOPING THAT YOU ALL WILL MAKE
THIS CONSIDERATION AND
COMMUNICATE YOUR EXPECTATIONS
BEFORE THE RFP FOR THE PROGRAM
ITSELF IS DESIGNED OK, BUT YOU
KNOW, COUNCIL MAY NOT THE
MAJORITY OF YOU MAY NOT AGREE
WITH THAT.
BUT YOU KNOW, WE WANT TO MAKE
OUR RECOMMENDATION SO THAT
WE&apos;RE ON THE RECORD AS SAYING
THAT.
&gt;&gt; SO WE&apos;VE GOT TWO RESOLUTIONS
ON BACK THEN.
RIGHT?
THE ONE THAT WAS SUBMITTED IN
THE COUNCIL MINUTES LAST AT THE
LAST MEETING THAT WAS ABOUT
TRAFFIC DATA TRANSPARENCY
ACTUALLY.
&gt;&gt; SO COMPLETELY UNRELATED.
&gt;&gt; RIGHT.
BUT WE&apos;VE GOT TO ON TASK FROM
ECOG THEN LIKE ON DECK IF THAT
IF THE OTHER ONE IS MOVED TO A
COUNCIL AGENDA AND THIS IS ALSO
MOVED TO THE COUNCIL AGENDA,
THEN WE HAVE TO MAKE MY
TRACKING.
&gt;&gt; YOU ARE I DON&apos;T THIS ONE
WON&apos;T COME UP TO YOU GUYS
BEFORE YOUR NEXT MEETING THOUGH
I DON&apos;T THINK WE HAD A PACKET
OUT TODAY.
RIGHT.
ALL RIGHT.
OK, I&apos;M JUST TRYING TO FIGURE
OUT THE TIMING.
YOU KNOW, AND THEN TRY TO SEE
WHAT THE CONVERSATIONS WOULD BE
LIKE WITH OTHER COUNCIL MEMBERS
I GUESS TO CO-SPONSOR IT.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, I MEAN AND WE&apos;RE HAPPY
TO ENGAGE IN THOSE
CONVERSATIONS TO TALK ABOUT WHY
WE THINK THE CALL RESPONSE
MODEL THAT WE HAVE A CALL
RESPONSE MODEL ALREADY FOR
EXAMPLE AND IT&apos;S DOING WHAT
IT&apos;S DOING AND THERE ARE PLENTY
OF RESIDENTS, WORKERS AND
VISITORS WHO DO NOT USE THAT
MODEL BECAUSE THEY DO NOT WANT
TO INTERACT WITH LAW
ENFORCEMENT AND THOSE PEOPLE
CERTAINLY DESERVE PUBLIC SAFETY
AS WELL.
&gt;&gt; OK, I&apos;M JUST TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT THE PROCESS AND HOW
TO MOVE THIS BECAUSE I MEAN WE
HAVE THESE CONVERSATIONS HERE
IN COMMITTEE AND THEN IN
COMMUNITY AND THEN WHEN IT GETS
TO THE TABLE I WANT TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE&apos;RE WE UNDERSTAND
WHAT WE&apos;RE ASKING FOR THAT
THAT&apos;S COMMUNICATED WITH STAFF
TOO.
SO IT&apos;S SO THAT WE KNOW WHAT
WE&apos;RE ASKING OF THEM TO DO, YOU
KNOW, LIKE IN A REALLY SPECIFIC
WAY AND IF WE CAN BE MORE CLEAR
HERE OR IF WE NEED MORE IN THE
WHEREAS CLAUSES TO BE MORE
CLEAR THAT WAY OR IF YOU THINK
WE NEED TO DO BETTER COUNCIL
EDUCATION WHICH IS DEFINITELY
POSSIBLE WE CAN DO THAT.
YEAH, I DON&apos;T KNOW WHAT THE
TIMING IS WITH THE RFP SO AGAIN
HOW ARE WAYS OUT?
&gt;&gt; I DON&apos;T THINK THE CITY WILL
BE EVEN FINISHED WITH COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT BEFORE THE SUMMER IS
WHAT I&apos;VE HEARD.
SORRY WE ARE HOPING THAT
STUDENTS GET TO PARTICIPATE IN
THAT PROCESS THOUGH AND SO IF
IT&apos;S TOTALLY CONDUCTED WHEN
THERE ARE NEW STUDENTS HERE ARE
NOT MANY STUDENTS HERE OR JUST
GRAD STUDENTS, UNDERGRAD
STUDENTS YOU KNOW WE ARE
CONCERNED THAT UNDERGRAD
STUDENTS WON&apos;T BE INCLUDED IN
THE COMMUNITY OUTREACH BUT
THAT&apos;S NOT FOR US TO BE SURE.
YEAH, ALL RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
OF COURSE
QUESTIONS OTHER
QUESTIONS COMMENTS THAT SO I&apos;D
LIKE TO MOVE THE RESOLUTION AS
AMENDED.
IS THERE A SECOND SECOND THAT
ALL IN FAVOR OF THE MOTION AS
OF THE RESOLUTION AS AMENDED
SAY AY AY AY AY YI OPPOSED OK,
I&apos;LL MAKE THOSE AND SEND THAT
TO MISOGYNOUS AND WE CAN MOVE
ON TO NEW BUSINESS WHICH IS
TALKING ABOUT THE DISTRIBUTION
OF THE MARIJUANA EXCISE TAX.
WE HAD A COUPLE QUESTIONS FROM
COUNCIL THAT WE COULDN&apos;T ANSWER
AND SO WE ARE FORTUNATE TO HAVE
ATTORNEYS WITH US TODAY
TO TALK
ABOUT HOW SOME OF THE MARIJUANA
EXCISE TAX FUNDS ARE BEING
USED.
&gt;&gt; I NEED GLASSES FOR THIS BUT
ME AT THE PODIUM I DIDN&apos;T KNOW
I WAS COMING FROM BUT I WILL DO
MY BACK.
&gt;&gt; OK, YOU SHOULD HAVE CALLED
US.
WHY DID YOU NOT GO ASK US?
BUT COME ON WHATEVER YOU IF YOU
HAVEN&apos;T YOU DID WHAT YOU NEED.
YEAH DID YOU WE NEED FRANCIS OR
I DIDN&apos;T GET EMAILS OR TEXTS
BUT WE&apos;RE GOOD AND YOU COULD
PROBABLY HELP US ANYWAY SO ONE
OF THE QUESTIONS QUESTIONS WAS
WHAT ARE THE DISTRIBUTIONS
OF THE EXCISE TAX HAS BEEN SORT
OF GRANDFATHERED IN ALREADY HAS
TO DO WITH DIVERSION PROGRAMS.
&gt;&gt; YEAH AND ONE OF THE
QUESTIONS WE GOT FROM
COMMISSIONERS AS WELL WAS ABOUT
WHAT THE DATA LOOK LIKE FROM
THOSE PROGRAMS.
SO A DIVERSION THERE ARE TWO
THINGS THAT WERE INITIALLY
FUNDED FROM THE FIRST ROUND
OF MARIJUANA EXCISE TAX.
&gt;&gt; SO THAT CAME AND MY NUMBERS
ARE A LITTLE OFF BUT IT&apos;S FOUR
EIGHTY SIX FOR NINETY SIX FOUR
HUNDRED NINETY SIX THOUSAND
DOLLARS.
&gt;&gt; WE HAD THE FIRST YEAR
COUNCIL PASSED A RESOLUTION
GENERALLY IT WAS LAST MARCH
GENERALLY SAYING THESE MONEY
SHOULD BE USED TO HELP A
POPULAR ACTION THAT WAS MOST
AFFECTED BY THE WAR ON DRUGS.
RIGHT.
WE NEED TO FIX SOME OF THE
INSTITUTIONAL WRONGS THAT CAME
FROM AND ALSO A CAVEAT TO HELP
AT RISK YOUTH.
RIGHT.
SO THE TWO PROGRAMS THAT CAME
OUT OF THAT ONE WERE THE
EXPUNGEMENT PROGRAM AND THAT
PROGRAM HAS SERVICE.
I THINK WE&apos;RE ALMOST AT ONE
HUNDRED PEOPLE SINCE WE DIDN&apos;T
GET THAT STARTED JULY 1ST WE
STARTED SEEING OUR FIRST FOLKS
I THINK IN AUGUST BUT WE HAVE
ONE HUNDRED OR RIGHT AT ONE
HUNDRED FOLKS THAT HAVE DONE
INTAKES ARE IN OUR IN-PROCESS
OR HAVE BEEN GRANTED
EXPUNGEMENT SO FAR.
THIS SECOND PROGRAM IS
DIVERSION NOW IT&apos;S DIVERSION
FROM THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE
SYSTEM SO THIS IS KIND OF A
STEP ONE OF JUSTICE REFORM
DIVERSION WORKS WHEN SOMEBODY
HAS BEEN ALREADY BECOMES
JUSTICE INVOLVED.
THEY&apos;VE BEEN ISSUED A CITATION.
THEY&apos;VE BEEN CHARGED WITH THE
CRIME.
THE GOAL IS TO DIVERT THEM OUT
OF THE JUSTICE SYSTEM BY
HELPING THEM ADDRESS THE ROOT
CAUSE OF JUSTICE INVOLVEMENT.
IT DOESN&apos;T MEAN THAT THERE&apos;S NO
ACCOUNTABILITY.
I KNOW THAT&apos;S A VERY COMMON
MISCONCEPTION LIKE OH, WE&apos;RE
JUST KICKING PEOPLE OUT.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;RE LETTING THEM GO.
THE GOAL IS TO PROVIDE THEM
WITH A HAND UP NOT A HAND OUT
AND THAT IT&apos;S INDIVIDUALLY
TAILORED FOR EACH PERSON.
IT IS A TRAUMA INFORMED
PROGRAM.
WE ARE NOT WE DON&apos;T FORCE
PEOPLE INTO TREATMENT PROGRAMS.
WE DON&apos;T TELL THEM THEY HAVE TO
TAKE THEIR MEDICATION MYSELF
THE DEFENSE ATTORNEY IF THERE
IS ONE IF NOT AND THEY
REPRESENT THEMSELVES, WE TRY TO
SIT DOWN AND DISCUSS WHAT
THINGS THAT THEY NEED SO THAT
THEY&apos;RE NOT SEEN BY THE COURTS
IN THIS CAPACITY.
&gt;&gt; AGAIN, IT HAS BEEN VERY
SUCCESSFUL.
I ONLY KNOW OF ONE PERSON WHO
DIDN&apos;T MAKE IT THROUGH THE
DIVERSION PROGRAM AND HE&apos;S ON
STATUS.
I JUST WE LOST TRACK OF HIM.
I DON&apos;T KNOW WHERE HE IS.
HE&apos;S OK.
BUT OTHER THAN THAT WE HAVE
OVER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY
PEOPLE SINCE LAST JULY THAT
WE&apos;VE SERVICED.
THAT MEANS NOT CHARGES OR
CRIMES.
&gt;&gt; TWO HUNDRED FIFTY PEOPLE
KEEP IN MIND SOME OF THESE
FOLKS THAT HAVE BEEN PART
OF THIS PROGRAM HAVE 16, 17, 20
CASES.
SO ALL OF THOSE CASES ARE
REMOVED FROM THEIR RECORD WHICH
IS PRETTY AMAZING AND JUST
BECAUSE YOU GO THROUGH A
DIVERSION IF YOU THIS IS A
GENTLEMAN WHO&apos;S BEEN GONE AND
IN THE WIND FROM US AND WHEN HE
WANTS TO COME BACK WE&apos;RE GOING
TO HELP HIM GET BACK ON TRACK
AND TRY TO GET HIM THE SERVICES
THAT HE NEEDS.
THE NICE PART ABOUT THE
DIVERSION PROGRAM IS WHEN I
FIRST STARTED HERE AT THE FALL
OF TWENTY SEVENTEEN I WAS
SEEING THE SAME KIDS OVER AND
OVER AGAIN, THE SAME ADULTS
WITH THE SAME ISSUES AND I&apos;M
LIKE OH AND THEY&apos;D BE LIKE HI
PROSECUTOR LADY AND LIKE WE
KNEW EACH OTHER LIKE BASICALLY
ON A FIRST NAME BASIS WE&apos;D SEE
EACH OTHER DOWNTOWN AND IT WAS
JUST LIKE A PART OF THEIR LIFE
WAS LIKE TO COME TO COURT AND
WHEN THEY COULDN&apos;T PAY THE
FINES AND COSTS SO THEN THEY&apos;D
GET AN ORDER TO SHOW CAUSE TO
PAY.
WE WEREN&apos;T DOING ABILITY TO PAY
HEARINGS.
WE WEREN&apos;T DOING ANYTHING
DIFFERENT WHICH IS REALLY THE
PROBLEM.
WE CAN&apos;T KEEP DOING THE SAME
DARN THING AND EXPECT TO HAVE A
DIFFERENT OUTCOME.
SO HELPING PEOPLE ADDRESS THE
ROOT CAUSE HAS BEEN THE ORDER
OF BUSINESS FOR DIVERSION.
ONE COUNCIL FUNDED THAT THEY
GAVE IT TO US IN A TWO YEAR
PILOT PROGRAM.
WE COME TO THE END OF OUR FIRST
YEAR
ON JUNE 30TH AND SO WE
WILL PROVIDE NUMBERS
UNFORTUNATELY DATA ISN&apos;T THAT
ALWAYS THE PROBLEM?
WE DON&apos;T HAVE A DATA SYSTEM TO
TRACK PEOPLE BY RACE OR AGE OR
SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS.
WE HAVE A VERY TALENTED SOCIAL
WORKER IN THE PROBATION
DEPARTMENT THAT HAS AN EXCEL
SHEET.
THAT&apos;S WHAT WE HAVE.
SO BUT WE WILL BE ABLE TO
REPORT BACK TO YOU AS TO HOW
MANY PEOPLE ARE IN THE PROGRAM
AND HAVE COMPLETED FOLKS WHO
ARE STILL WORKING THEIR WAY
THROUGH COMMISSIONER TO DOOR
HARGREAVES, DO YOU HAVE ANY
IDEA I GUESS OF HOW MANY PEOPLE
HOW MANY MORE YOU WOULD BE ABLE
TO PROVIDE SERVICE TO IF THERE
WERE MORE MONEY?
IS THERE ANYBODY YOU&apos;RE NOT
REACHING?
I GUESS IS WHAT I&apos;M TRYING TO
GET AT?
&gt;&gt; YES, AND THIS IT&apos;S HARD TO
QUANTIFY HOW MUCH MORE MONEY I
WOULD MEAN TO PUT A PROGRAM
FORTH LIKE THIS.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I LOOK
AT IS IN THE SPIRIT OF NOT
DOING THE SAME THING THAT WE&apos;VE
ALWAYS DONE IS MAYBE TRYING TO
HELP THESE FOLKS BEFORE THEY
BECOME JUSTICE INVOLVED.
THAT&apos;S WHERE WE&apos;RE REALLY
MISSING HERE IS THAT AND I&apos;LL
TELL YOU A QUICK ODDITY.
THERE WAS A GENTLEMAN THAT I
WORKED WITH ONE BACK WHEN I
USED TO WORK IN THE JAIL ONE
HUNDRED YEARS AGO AND HE HAD A
TREATMENT SO BADLY AND HE WAS
READY TO BE SOBER HE HAD HIT
HIS POINT AND HE IS LIKE HELP
ME GET INTO TREATMENT.
AND I&apos;M LIKE OH YOU DON&apos;T
QUALIFY FOR THIS KIND
OF ASSURANCE AND YOUR CRIME
WASN&apos;T SERIOUS ENOUGH FOR US
BEING THE STATE TO SEND YOU TO
RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT LIKE WE
NEEDED HIM TO DO SOMETHING MORE
SERIOUS AND MAYBE HAVE A VICTIM
OR SOMETHING THAT HE HAD HIGHER
SENTENCING GUIDELINES TO SEND
HIM TO TREATMENT AND I JUST
READ AN ARTICLE ABOUT HIM IN
THE NEWSPAPER.
HE IT&apos;S I THINK WE&apos;RE LOOKING
AT MAYBE SEVENTEEN EIGHTEEN
YEARS LATER HE JUST GRADUATED
FROM A DRUG COURT PROGRAM BUT
HE HAD ALL THAT TIME IN THE
MEANTIME IF WE HAD HELPED HIM
MAYBE FROM THE BEGINNING I
THINK ABOUT ALL THE MISSED
OPPORTUNITIES SO WHAT I WOULD
LOVE TO HAVE FUNDED AS PART
OF THAT PROGRAM IS ADDITIONAL
MONIES TO BE ABLE TO WORK WITH
TRANSPORTATION COSTS AND A
BUDGET FOR IDENTIFICATION IS A
HUGE BARRIER FOR THOSE OF YOU
WHO WORK IN THE SOCIAL SERVICE
COMMUNITY YOU KIND OF HAVE TO
HAVE ID TO DO EVERYTHING YOU
WANT TO HAVE A JOB, GOT TO HAVE
I.D. DO YOU HAVE TO HAVE TO GET
ID?
YOU GOT TO GET A BIRTH
CERTIFICATE RIGHT.
BIRTH CERTIFICATES ARE
EXPENSIVE.
I JUST HAD TO ORDER ONE FROM
THE STATE OF INDIANA WITH
SEVENTY FIVE DOLLARS.
RIGHT.
I BLESSED THAT I WAS ABLE TO
AFFORD IT BUT THAT&apos;S REALLY
COST PROHIBITIVE WHEN YOU&apos;RE
APPLYING FOR A JOB WHEN YOU&apos;RE
TRYING TO GET AN APARTMENT ALL
OF THOSE THINGS REQUIRE ID AND
THAT&apos;S A HICCUP THAT I SUFFER
FROM.
I TALK TO THE PROBATION
DEPARTMENT ESTIMATED I BELIEVE
IT WAS SIXTY FIVE PERCENT
OF THEIR PARTICIPANTS IN THE
SPECIALTY COURTS HAVE ID ISSUES
.
SO SO A COUPLE QUESTIONS MA&apos;AM.
IF YOU CAN&apos;T IF YOU&apos;RE NOT I&apos;M
NOT SURE IF YOUR SOCIAL WORKERS
EXCEL SPREADSHEET DOESN&apos;T HAVE
RACE OR AND HOW DO WE KNOW THAT
THESE ARE THE PEOPLE THAT
EXCISE TAX MONEY WAS DESIGNED
TO ASSIST?
WELL, IT IS OVER 80 PERCENT
OF MY DOCKET.
&gt;&gt; WHAT I MEAN IS HOW SHOULD I
COUNSEL I COULD GO THROUGH ONE
BY ONE AND PUT THEIR THEIR RACE
AND AN APPROXIMATE AGE MOST
OF THEM THERE IS A WAY I CAN
COUPLE DISTINCTION AS TO
WHETHER OR NOT THEY QUALIFY FOR
INDIGENT DEFENSE THAT WOULD
MEET YOUR ALICE OR BULLO ALICE
GUIDELINES.
THAT&apos;S AN EASY THING TO FIGURE
OUT BECAUSE THAT IS SOMETHING
THAT THE COURT DOES ON NEARLY
ALL OF THE UNIVERSITY CASES.
WE HAVE VERY FEW CASES THAT ARE
NOT RELATED TO DRUNK DRIVING
WHERE THERE&apos;S PRIVATE COUNSEL
RETAINED SO WE HAVE BEEN
TALKING WITH JUDGES AND OTHERS
IN THE PROBATION SYSTEM AND THE
COURT SYSTEM AND ONE OF THE
CONCERNS IS THAT MANY OF THE
SPECIALTY PROGRAMS THAT ARE
AVAILABLE TO PEOPLE ARE IN AND
OF THEMSELVES
DISPROPORTIONATELY USED BY NOT
PEOPLE OF COLOR, NOT LOWER
INCOME PEOPLE AND THAT EVEN THE
SPECIAL PROGRAMS HAVE LOTS
OF DISPARITIES IN THE WAY THAT
THEY ARE DOLED OUT.
&gt;&gt; AND SO I THINK IT&apos;D BE LIKE
A BIG THING FOR US TO MAKE SURE
THAT THIS IS NOT JUST A
REPETITION OF THAT AND THAT WE
COULD SEE.
&gt;&gt; SO YOU KNOW, TRAFFIC STOP
FOLKS HAVE TO GIVE US DATA ON
IS WE KNOW CRIME STATS HAVE
THIS KIND OF DATA AND SO I
THINK IT WOULD BE LIKE A BASIC
EXPECTATION THAT WE WOULD SEE
SOME INDICATION OF AT LEAST
PERCEIVED RACE AGE IN THE DATA
IN TERMS OF WHO&apos;S BEING SERVED
TO MAKE SURE THAT THIS IS IN
FACT THAT COMMUNITY.
AND I THINK THE OTHER QUESTION
IS IF THIS IS BEING RUN OUT
OF THE CITY ATTORNEY&apos;S OFFICE I
MEAN WE ARE TALKING ABOUT
DIVERSION AND YOU&apos;RE TALKING
ABOUT WORKING WITH THE PAROLE
SYSTEM PROBATION SYSTEM.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
SO THESE PEOPLE SEEM TO BE SO
THIS DEFINITELY SEEMS TO BE A
DIVERSION PROGRAM AND MAYBE
THERE&apos;S THERE&apos;S SOME ASSISTANCE
THAT HAPPENS SUCH THAT THEY
AREN&apos;T AS ENMESHED IN THE
SYSTEM AS THEY MIGHT OTHERWISE
BE.
&gt;&gt; BUT UNLESS SO UNLESS IT&apos;S
CLEAR THAT THESE ARE PEOPLE WHO
WERE TARGETED AS THIS KIND
OF THE AS THE BENEFICIARIES
OF THE EXCISE TAX THAT WOULD
SEEM TO BE PROBLEMATIC AND THAT
WOULD SEEM TO BE SOMETHING THAT
SHOULD BE DOCUMENTED WITHOUT
QUESTION AND MAY ONE JUST
BECAUSE I FEEL LIKE THERE&apos;S
LOTS COMING, HUH?
I DON&apos;T WANT TO LOSE OUT ON
THIS.
&gt;&gt; NO, I DON&apos;T WANT YOU TO JUMP
IN.
I UNDERSTAND AND I WISH I HAD A
PROGRAM A DATA SET WHERE I THIS
IS LIKE AN EASILY OBTAINED
THING BUT THIS IS MANUAL DATA
ENTRY ON FOLKS WHO ARE ALREADY
GAINFULLY EMPLOYED DOING
EVERYTHING THEY POSSIBLY CAN
AND ARE WORKING AT CAPACITY WE
USE.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;D LIKE TO 50 PEOPLE RIGHT
JUST WELL TO GO CASE BY CASE
THERE&apos;S PROBABLY HUNDREDS MORE
THAN THAT.
OK, YES.
YEAH THAT&apos;S WHAT YOU&apos;RE SO YOU
NEED LIKE A COLLEGE INTERN TO
GO HE SOME STUFF CODE SOME
STUFF FOR YOU WE CAN FIND YOU
KNOW I&apos;M SURE IT&apos;S ALL WELL
BACKFILLED BY LINE.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT WELL I THINK
THAT&apos;S THE THING AND THEN SO
WE&apos;RE CLEAR THAT WE&apos;RE NOT
TALKING ABOUT DEFLECTION AT
ALL.
NO, NO.
WE DON&apos;T HAVE A BUDGET FOR I
JUST WANT TO MAKE THAT CLEAR
BECAUSE WE KEEP HEARING ABOUT
DIFFERENT TERMS TURN AROUND AND
DEFLECTION WOULD BE DIRECTING
PEOPLE AWAY FROM GETTING
INVOLVED IN THE SYSTEM IN THE
FIRST PLACE.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S PROACTIVE, SOMETHING WE
DON&apos;T DO RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; AND SO THEN IF THIS SO DOES
THIS PROGRAM LIVE IN THE CITY
ATTORNEY&apos;S OFFICE, WHERE DOES
THIS PROGRAM LIVE?
IT GENERALLY LIVES WITHIN THE
CITY ATTORNEY&apos;S OFFICE.
I MAKE AGREEMENTS TO DO THE
DEFLECTION WITH DEFENSE COUNSEL
OR LIKE I SAID THE PROPER
PERSON FOR THOSE WHO ARE
REPRESENTING THEMSELVES.
BUT IF YOU MEAN DIVERSA WHO
ACTUALLY WORKS IN THE PROBATION
DEPARTMENT IS THE I WANT TO SAY
HE DOES THE CHECKS AND BALANCES
FOR ME LIKE IF SOMEBODY AGREES
THAT THEY ARE GOING TO GO TO
THE DISPUTE RESOLUTION CENTER,
HE PROVIDES PROOF BACK TO ME
THAT THAT WAS COMPLETED.
IF SOMEBODY WANTS TO DO
COMMUNITY SERVICE OR MAKE A
PUBLIC SERVICE ANNOUNCEMENT
LIKE SOME OF THEM ARE DOING
ESSAYS, IT&apos;S KIND OF A LITTLE I
MEAN IT&apos;S REALLY INDIVIDUALIZED
.
SO SOMETIMES IT&apos;S JUST MAINTAIN
CONTACT WITH YOUR CURRENT
CASEWORKER FROM AVALON.
&gt;&gt; YOU JUST USE THE WORD
DEFLECTION.
&gt;&gt; BUT YOU MEANT DIVERSION,
RIGHT?
YES.
I&apos;M SORRY I MEANT TO THAT&apos;S
THAT IS LIKE SO WHATEVER IT IS
FOR THAT PERSON TO HAVE A
RELEASE OF INFORMATION AND JOE
FROM THE PROBATION DEPARTMENT
WILL JUST GIVE A CHECKS AND
BALANCE FOR US BECAUSE I TRIED
TO DO IT MY FIRST COUPLE
OF YEARS AND I DON&apos;T HAVE THE
BANDWIDTH TO BE A CASE MANAGER
FOR TWO HUNDRED PEOPLE.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M SORRY SO THIS CAME UNDER
THE INITIAL ACCESS RESOLUTION
WE TALKED ABOUT WAS DONE LAST
MARCH IN 2021.
YES.
JUST UNDER FIVE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS.
YES.
DO YOU HAVE ANY IDEA HOW MUCH
OF THAT IS LEFT?
&gt;&gt; NO I DON&apos;T.
THE REQUEST THAT I HAD WAS FOR
OH ONE HUNDRED AND MAYBE ONE
HUNDRED AND THIRTY THOUSAND FOR
THE DIVERSION PROGRAM THAT
WOULD BE STAFF TIME.
THAT INCLUDES HELPING PEOPLE
LIKE IF THEY NEEDED TO BE ON
TOGETHER LIKE BECAUSE THAT WAS
SOMETHING THAT THEIR SPONSOR
WAS A GOOD IDEA.
&gt;&gt; I AND BILLY DO IT AT THAT
AND EXPUNGEMENT THAT WE WERE
ABLE TO HELP A HUNDRED PEOPLE
WINDY THOUSAND ISH SOMEWHERE IN
THERE.
OK, THOSE ARE THAT&apos;S ACTUALLY
PRETTY COSTLY OF OUR PROGRAM TO
HAVE AN EXPUNGEMENT THERE&apos;S A
FIFTY DOLLAR FEE YOU HAVE TO
PAY TO THE STATE POLICE CHIEF
CATHY WAS PRETTY FANTASTIC AND
SAID ANYONE WHO WAS APPLYING
FOR EXPUNGEMENT DOESN&apos;T HAVE TO
PAY FOR FINGERPRINTS AT THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR.
JUST MAKE AN APPOINTMENT WHICH
WAS NICE BECAUSE THERE&apos;S A COST
ASSOCIATED WITH THAT.
YOU HAVE TO PAY FOR CERTIFIED
RECORDS FROM EVERY PLACE YOU&apos;VE
GOTTEN A CONVICTION FROM.
AND NOT ONLY IS THAT EXTREMELY
ONEROUS AND DIFFICULT, IT&apos;S
EXPENSIVE BECAUSE SOMETIMES YOU
PAY PER PAGE AND SO JOE FROM
THE PROBATION DEPARTMENT HE
ORDERS ALL OF THAT DOES INTAKE
AND WE HAVE A CONTRACT WITH THE
PUBLIC DEFENDER&apos;S OFFICE AND
THEY FOR NEXT TO NOTHING I
DON&apos;T WANT TO SAY DOLLAR
AMOUNT.
I THINK IT&apos;S LIKE TEN THOUSAND
DOLLARS OR LESS.
THEY TAKE ALL OF THE REFERRALS
FROM OUR OFFICE TO REPRESENT
THEM.
&gt;&gt; OK, THANK YOU CHAIR.
I HAVE A QUESTION OH HOW THIS
PROGRAM WORKS.
HOW YOU REACH OUT TO THE
INDIVIDUALS WHO MIGHT BENEFIT
FROM THE DIVERSION.
IS IT THROUGH THE PROBATION
THAT YOU HAVE THE CASES HOW HOW
THAT SO ACTUALLY WHEN SOMEBODY
IS GIVEN A CITATION UNDER THE
CITY ORDINANCE THEY HAVE TEN
DAYS TO MAKE
AN APPOINTMENT TO
COME IN TO BE ARRAIGNED IN
FRONT OF THE JUDGE.
VERY RARELY AM AT THOSE INITIAL
ARRAIGNMENTS.
THOSE ARE SOMETIMES IN FRONT
OF A MAGISTRATE BUT WHEN THEY
FIRST COME INTO COURT THEY ARE
GIVEN THE OPPORTUNITY TO BE
REPRESENTED BY COUNSEL AND I
TALK WITH THE EXCEPTION
OF PROBABLY ABOUT 10 PERCENT
OF MY CONSOLIDATED UP TO THE
DEFENSE ATTORNEY OR IF THEY&apos;RE
REPRESENTING THEMSELVES TO EACH
PERSON ABOUT DIVERSION.
SOME OF THEM I DON&apos;T THERE&apos;S NO
DIVERSION ON DRUNK DRIVING OR
DRUNK DRIVING IN THE AND THIS
IS GOING TO BE CONVEYED TO THE
INDIVIDUALS THAT THIS IS AN
OPTION, THIS IS AN OPTION AND
EVERYBODY AND WE PUT A LITTLE
BIT ON THE RECORD BUT NOT A TON
BECAUSE PART OF THIS PROCESS
TOO IS NOT BEING SETTLED WITH
WHAT HAPPENS IN COURT FOR THE
REST OF YOUR DAYS.
AND I&apos;LL GIVE YOU AN EXAMPLE.
YOU HAVE A YOUNG KID AND THEY
COME IN AND THEY DO SOMETHING
REALLY DUMB AND IT HAPPENS TO
BE A CRIME AND A CITATION FOR
IT THE MORE STUFF THAT THEIR
ATTORNEY AND I PUT ON THE
RECORD LIKE HEY, AREN&apos;T WE
PROUD OF JIM SHIU TODAY HE
COMPLETED HIS ESSAY AND HIS
COMMUNITY SERVICE AND WE&apos;RE
MAKING A RECORD THAT CAN
SOMEBODY CAN PAY FOR FIFTEEN
TWENTY BUCKS AND GET A CD
OF THAT LATER.
RIGHT.
BUT WE&apos;VE GOT TO BE ABLE TO
DOCUMENT THAT FOR TRANSPARENCY
SAKE, RIGHT?
WE DO DACULA IT BUT NOT FOR
TRANSPARENCY OF EVERYONE IS
DOCUMENTED FOR THAT PARTICULAR
INDIVIDUAL IN THE COURT FILE
BUT WE&apos;RE NOT MAKING A PUBLIC
BROADCASTER KEEP IN MIND RIGHT
NOW.
&gt;&gt; NO, NO, NO BUT YOU COULD
DOCUMENT ACCOUNTING FOR EXAMPLE
HOW THE MONEY WAS IN THE
PROBATION DEPARTMENT DOCUMENTS
THE REQUIREMENTS THAT THEY HAD
THE DEFENSE ATTORNEY GETS YOU
KNOW, THEY HAVEN&apos;T DOCUMENTED
BUT WE&apos;RE NOT MAKING A PUBLIC
ANNOUNCEMENT ABOUT IT.
&gt;&gt; RIGHT.
COURT IS BROADCAST TO RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S TRANSPARENCY.
WE JUST MEANT YOU COULD REPORT
WE SERVED X NUMBER OF PEOPLE.
&gt;&gt; YES, WE SERVE OUR PEOPLE AND
THEN WE USUALLY SO EACH PERSON
IS KIND OF GIVEN THE
OPPORTUNITY AND DIVERSION LOOKS
DIFFERENT FOR EVERYBODY.
SO SOME PEOPLE IT&apos;S JUST I
DON&apos;T WANT TO SEE YOU BACK IN
HERE.
THEY DON&apos;T HAVE ADDITIONAL
NEEDS TO BE ADDRESSED AND SO
WE&apos;LL KICK THEIR CASE OUT
SEVERAL MONTHS AND THEN THEN
IT&apos;S DONE AND I DISMISSED IT
AND SO DO WE KNOW LIKE IS THERE
HOW DO YOU HOW DO PEOPLE ACCESS
THE PROGRAM?
IS THERE A RUBRIC THAT SORT
OF LENDS PEOPLE TO FALL INTO
YOUR SORRY INTO YOUR PATH DO
YOU PEOPLE CHARGED A CITY
OFFENSES WITH THE EXCEPTION
OF THE ASSAULT AND BATTERIES OR
WHERE A VICTIM A CRIME VICTIM
UNDER THE STATE CONSTITUTION AS
DEFINED IN THEIR OBJECTING TO
IT THAT CALLS FOR MORE
CONVERSATIONS DRUNK AND DRUNK
DRIVING THOSE THOSE ARE NOT ON
THE DEFERRAL TRACK.
IT&apos;S GENERALLY OFFER TO JUST
ABOUT EVERYBODY.
SO TO BE CLEAR, I HAVE PAROLEES
IN THE DIVERSION PROGRAM.
YOU&apos;RE NOT PRECLUDED BECAUSE
OF PAST CHOICES
.
GOT IT.
SO THE CURRENT REQUEST IS SIX
HUNDRED THIRTY FIVE THOUSAND,
RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; THE CURRENT REQUEST FOR OUT
OF THE EXCISE TAX MONEY FOR THE
UPCOMING FISCAL YEAR NO, I
DON&apos;T HAVE AN ADDITIONAL
REQUEST OUTSIDE OF THE UNDER
TWO HUNDRED THAT INITIALLY I
DON&apos;T HAVE A REQUEST FOR ANY
ADDITIONAL MONEY.
THE FIRST TO COMMENT I&apos;M SORRY
I SHOULD FUND IT FOR TWO YEARS
AS A PILOT PROGRAM TO SEE HOW
WE&apos;RE LOOKING AND I HAVE HAD NO
ADDITIONAL REQUEST FOR ANYTHING
OUTSIDE OF THAT.
&gt;&gt; RIGHT.
SO WHAT I MEAN IS WHAT DO YOU
HAVE AN IDEA OF THE TOTAL THAT
WILL BE ALLOCATED FOR THE
PROGRAM IN THE UPCOMING FISCAL
YEAR?
I DON&apos;T BUT I THINK WE&apos;RE
OPERATING WITH THE SAME BUDGET
THAT WAS ALREADY DECIDED THAT
WAS ALREADY DECIDED AND VOTED
ON.
&gt;&gt; SO IS THAT THE IS THAT THE
ADDITIONAL LIKE WHAT&apos;S LEFT
BETWEEN THE TWO HUNDRED THAT
YOU JUST SAID AND FOR NINETY
SIX OR WHATEVER VERY POSSIBLE
ABOUT COUNCIL MEMBER AMRELI YOU
LOOK LIKE YOU&apos;VE GOT INTO YEAH
THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M SORRY MADAM NO WORRIES
PLEASE GO AHEAD.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;RE RUNNING DIFFERENT
NUMBERS HERE AND WE DON&apos;T HAVE
ANYTHING IN FRONT OF US REALLY
TO GO REFER TO THE INITIAL
AMOUNT WAS THE FOUR HUNDRED AND
FIFTY TO FIVE HUNDRED THOUSAND
DOLLARS THAT WAS FOR TWO YEARS
SO THERE NEEDS TO BE HOPEFULLY
A CONVERSATION TO CLEAR THE
MATTER BECAUSE THERE&apos;S A LOT
OF CONFUSION GOING ON RIGHT NOW
BECAUSE THE TALKS ABOUT THIS
BUDGET HAVE USED THAT NUMBER
FOUR HUNDRED AND FIFTY THOUSAND
DOLLARS OR SO AGAIN IS A PART
OF THIS ONE POINT FOUR MILLION
THAT WE&apos;RE GETTING THIS YEAR.
SO NOW WE&apos;RE DOUBLE DIPPING.
WE&apos;RE ASKING WHAT THIS PROGRAM
THAT WE&apos;VE BEEN FUNDED FOR TWO
YEARS BUT YET THIS YEAR WE&apos;VE
CARVED OUT ANOTHER ALMOST HALF
MILLION DOLLARS OF THE ONE
POINT FOUR MILLION COMING INTO
THIS YEAR.
SO THERE NEEDS TO BE
CONVERSATIONS ABOUT THAT AND
THEN THE THE SIX HUNDRED
THOUSAND NOT SURE THAT THAT
FIGURE IS COMING FROM BUT I
GUESS WE NEED A LITTLE WORK
SESSION HERE TO GET THROUGH
THESE NUMBERS AND TALK WITH
MARTY AND THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR MAKE SURE THAT
WE&apos;RE CLEAR ON WHAT THESE
FIGURES ARE BECAUSE UP UNTIL
NOW UP UNTIL RECENTLY MINUTES
AGO WE THOUGHT THAT THAT
DIVERSION AN EXPUNGEMENT
PROGRAM WAS JUST FUNDED FOR ONE
YEAR WITH THAT NEARLY HALF
MILLION DOLLARS, NOT TWO YEARS
AND STATEMENTS HAVE BEEN MADE
THAT THAT SAME AMOUNT WAS GOING
TO BE USED AGAIN THE ONE POINT
FOUR MILLION TO FUND IT AGAIN.
SO WE HAVE TO GET THAT CLEARED
UP.
I ALSO JUST WANTED TO GO BACK
TO THE DISCUSSION ABOUT AIDS.
I THOUGHT THE KIDS WERE GOING
TO BE ALSO FUNDED WITH THAT
INITIAL OUTLAY.
IS THAT HAPPENING NOT HAPPENING
.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S NOT HAPPENING.
WHY CURRENTLY NOT HAPPENING AS
PART OF THE DIVERSION PROGRAM
IDS WERE A SEPARATE PROGRAM, A
DEFLECTION.
THE AIDS AND COST ASSOCIATED
WITH THAT WERE A REQUEST IF
COUNCIL WERE TO LOOK AT
DEFLECTION AND THE FUTURE AND
THAT&apos;S MORE CASE MANAGEMENT
SERVICE.
IT&apos;S NOT JUSTICE INVOLVED
PEOPLE OR I SUPPOSE IT COULD BE
JUSTICE INVOLVED PEOPLE BUT
THEY&apos;RE REASON FOR HAVING
CONTACT WITH THE CITY WON&apos;T BE
BECAUSE THEY HAVE A PENDING
CASE OR PENDING INVESTIGATION.
IT REALLY IS TRULY LIKE A
COMMUNITY PREVENTION MODEL TO
HELP PEOPLE BEFORE THEY GET IN
TROUBLE.
AND SO THAT WAS THE REQUEST
ENTERTAINING THAT I THINK I
ASKED FOR THREE THOUSAND
DOLLARS TO HELP WITH
IDENTIFICATION PROCUREMENT AND
THAT WOULD INCLUDE LIKE A STATE
AID OR OBTAINING BIRTH
CERTIFICATES OR EVEN THE TEN
DOLLAR COST TO GET A BOOKING
PHOTO FROM THE WASHINGTON
COUNTY JAIL WHICH YOU CAN USE
AS A PIECE OF IDENTIFICATION TO
HELP GET YOUR DRIVER&apos;S LICENSE
OR EVEN A COUNTY ID LIKE.
&gt;&gt; WELL, THANKS.
I APPRECIATE IT.
IT&apos;S ALL I HAVE RIGHT NOW.
AND THEN WE GOT ONE QUESTION
THAT JUST CAME IN WHEN PEOPLE
PARTICIPATE IN THIS PROGRAM AND
JUST HELP ME WITH THE LEGAL
PART OF THIS HERE AND AS THEY
MOVE THROUGH THIS PROGRAM
LATER, DO THEY HAVE TO ANSWER
YOUR QUESTION ABOUT HAVING HAD
A CONVICTION?
THERE&apos;S NO CONVICTION SO
THERE&apos;S NO CONVICTION.
&gt;&gt; DON&apos;T HAVE TO HAVE ANSWERED
NO FINGERPRINTS, NO
FINGERPRINTS.
NO, NO.
SO PEOPLE WHO MOVE THROUGH THIS
PROCESS WHO MAY HAVE BEEN
FINGERPRINTED BEFORE THEY GET
TO REMOVE THOSE FROM THE SYSTEM
OR HOW&apos;S THAT WORK?
THERE&apos;S NOTHING IN THE
UNIVERSITY CODE WITH THE
EXCEPTION OF DRUNK AND DRUNK
DRIVING FOR WHICH YOU ARE
FINGERPRINTED TO BE
FINGERPRINTED YOU HAVE TO BE
CHARGED WITH AN OFFENSE HAS A
PENALTY GREATER THAN NINETY
THREE DAYS.
&gt;&gt; THE ONLY TWO CRIMES UNDER
THE UNIVERSITY ORDINANCE ARE
UNDER TEN WHEN A THE POLICE
CODE WHICH IS DRUNK DRIVING OR
DRUGGED DRIVING OR HIGH VAISSE
WHICH IS KIND OF AN ANOMALY BUT
IT&apos;S A SIX MONTH OFFENSE FOR
SOMEBODY DRIVING WITH A BLOOD
ALCOHOL LEVEL OF POINT ONE
SEVEN OR HIGHER AND SO WHAT
HAVE YOU FOUND IN YOUR
EXPERIENCE ABOUT PEOPLE?
OBVIOUSLY YOU CAN&apos;T KNOW THIS
BECAUSE YOU DON&apos;T WALK AROUND
WITH EVERYBODY HOLDING
EVERYBODY&apos;S HAND BUT LIKE AS
THEY ARE MOVING ON WITH THEIR
LIVES AND YOU ASK THE QUESTION
ABOUT HAVING BEEN ARRESTED, ARE
THESE PEOPLE ABLE TO SAY WITH
CONFIDENCE THAT THOSE RECORDS
DON&apos;T EXIST?
DO THEY GET TO SAY THAT I MEAN
I DON&apos;T GET ARRESTED DIFFERENT
THAN FINGERPRINTED?
YEAH.
BECAUSE SOMETIMES YOU CAN BE
ARRESTED WITHOUT FINGERPRINTED
.
HOPEFULLY THAT&apos;S NOT A QUESTION
THAT YOU TYPICALLY SEE TOO MUCH
ANY MORE.
HOWEVER, I DID FIND OUT FROM
ONE GRADUATE STUDENT RECENTLY,
SOON TO BE GRADUATE STUDENT
THAT THERE WAS AN APPLICATION
PROCESS.
THEY WERE SAYING HAVE YOU EVER
BEEN ARRAIGNED ON A CASE BEFORE
REGARDLESS OF THE DISPOSITION?
YOU KNOW, INCREDIBLY UNFAIR BUT
THEY WOULD HAVE TO ANSWER YES
TO THAT IN A DIVERSION TYPE
OF PROGRAM.
&gt;&gt; GOT IT.
OK, COOL.
THANK YOU AND THANK YOU FOR THE
FINGERPRINT PART TO ANYBODY
ELSE QUESTIONS, COMMENTS,
THOUGHTS.
GO AHEAD SOGGE WILL THERE BE A
REPORT OR AN UPDATE FOR COUNCIL
ON ALL OF THIS?
&gt;&gt; MR. ROYALLE WE WERE GOING TO
ADD SOMETHING TO COUNCIL AGENDA
CLOSER TO THE END OF THE FIRST
FISCAL YEAR OR SO PROBABLY
MAYBE FIRST MEETING IN JULY OR
SO JUST TO GIVE THE COMMUNITY
KIND OF AN UPDATE OF HOW THE
FIRST YEAR WENT, HOW MUCH MONEY
WE HAVE USED IF THERE IS
ADDITIONAL NEEDS OR CONCERNS
THAT MIGHT BE HELPFUL FOR
FUTURE BUDGETS GOALS AND HOW
MANY PEOPLE WE SERVED JUST IT&apos;S
A IT IS A GOOD CHUNK OF MONEY.
RIGHT.
WE&apos;RE TALKING ABOUT AROUND TWO
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS A
YEAR.
THAT&apos;S A HUGE ASK
I ASKED WHEN
YOU GUYS THINK ABOUT THAT THAT
IT&apos;S ONE HUNDRED THIRTY SEVEN
DOLLARS A DAY TO KEEP SOMEBODY
LOCKED UP AND I HAVEN&apos;T MET
ANYONE WHO&apos;S ACTUALLY COME OUT
OF JAIL BEEN LIKE I KNOW I&apos;M SO
MUCH BETTER OFF NOW THAT
DOESN&apos;T HAPPEN SO I THINK IT&apos;S
WE&apos;VE HAD GOOD NEWS BUT MR.
ROYALLE IS PREPARED TO MAKE
SAID END OF JUNE EARLY JULY
HOPEFULLY HE CAN COME SOON TO A
COUNCIL MEETING.
&gt;&gt; BUT IF THERE&apos;S BUT IF IF
THERE&apos;S IF THERE&apos;S A NEED
BEFORE THE BUDGET YOU MEANING
THAT IF YOU ALREADY SEE THAT
THERE IS AN ADDITIONAL NEED FOR
PUBLIC DEFENDERS DEFENDERS OR
BECAUSE I MEAN I&apos;M WORRIED
ABOUT IN THE MIDDLE THERE YOU
WERE SAYING THAT THERE ARE
FOLKS WHO REPRESENT THEMSELVES
BUT THAT&apos;S MY CHOICE.
SO I&apos;M AT EVERY STEP THERE IS A
COURT COURTROOM THE JUDGE READS
OR I READ WE TAKE TURNS BECAUSE
IT&apos;S KIND OF A LONG COURT RULE
AND WE MAKE SURE THAT YOU&apos;RE
OFFER YOU CAN HAVE DEFENSE IF
YOU WANT DEFENSE AND I&apos;VE NEVER
ACTUALLY SEEN ANYONE IN THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR BE DENIED
RIGHT TO COUNSEL LIKE THEY OH
YOU MAKE TOO MUCH MONEY.
IT&apos;S PRETTY LOOSE STANDARDS IN
THAT REGARD BUT EVERYONE&apos;S
GIVEN THE OPPORTUNITY EVERY
COURT HEARING.
SO IF YOU COME TO COURT THREE
TIMES AND ON THE FOURTH TIME
YOU DECIDE WHAT I&apos;D LIKE AN
ATTORNEY NOW WE DO THAT TOO.
SO THERE&apos;S ALWAYS A RIGHT TO
COUNSEL.
THERE&apos;S ALWAYS A RIGHT TO
IT&apos;S ONE OF MY FAVORITE MOMENTS
COUNSEL.
I THINK I&apos;M A PROSECUTOR.
IT&apos;S ONE OF MY FAVORITE MOMENTS
I LIKE MORE FORENSICS SO I
I THINK I&apos;M A PROSECUTOR.
COULDN&apos;T TELL YOU ANYTHING
I LIKE MORE FORENSICS SO I
ELSE.
COULDN&apos;T TELL YOU ANYTHING
THANK YOU.
ELSE.
SO THIS WAS GOOD.
THANK YOU.
THIS WAS SO HELPFUL.
SO THIS WAS GOOD.
&gt;&gt; THIS WAS LIKE A DIVERSION
THIS WAS SO HELPFUL.
ONE TO ONE.
&gt;&gt; THIS WAS LIKE A DIVERSION
OK, AND SO THIS WAS GREAT.
ONE TO ONE.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
OK, AND SO THIS WAS GREAT.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
GOOD.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
SO I BEFORE WE LEAVE THIS
GOOD.
TOPIC, I KNOW THERE&apos;S
SO I BEFORE WE LEAVE THIS
ADDITIONAL FUNDS COMING IN SO
TOPIC, I KNOW THERE&apos;S
THIS IS FUNDS THAT WE RECEIVED
ADDITIONAL FUNDS COMING IN SO
OR THAT THE CITY RECEIVED LAST
THIS IS FUNDS THAT WE RECEIVED
YEAR IN TWENTY TWENTY ONE.
OR THAT THE CITY RECEIVED LAST
SO NOW WE&apos;RE LOOKING AT
YEAR IN TWENTY TWENTY ONE.
ADDITIONAL FUNDS COMING IN
SO NOW WE&apos;RE LOOKING AT
TWENTY TWENTY TWO AND I THINK I
ADDITIONAL FUNDS COMING IN
JUST POKED AROUND NOW AND I
TWENTY TWENTY TWO AND I THINK I
JUST WANT TO STATE THAT THE
JUST POKED AROUND NOW AND I
RESOLUTION THAT WE&apos;RE TALKING
JUST WANT TO STATE THAT THE
ABOUT FROM MARCH OF TWENTY
RESOLUTION THAT WE&apos;RE TALKING
TWENTY ONE IS OUR TWENTY ONE
ABOUT FROM MARCH OF TWENTY
DASH ZERO NINE EIGHT AND IT WAS
TWENTY ONE IS OUR TWENTY ONE
PASSED MARCH 15TH OF TWENTY
DASH ZERO NINE EIGHT AND IT WAS
TWENTY ONE AND IN US RESOLVE IT
PASSED MARCH 15TH OF TWENTY
OUTLINES NOT ONLY FOR A
TWENTY ONE AND IN US RESOLVE IT
PROPOSED FISCAL YEAR TWENTY
OUTLINES NOT ONLY FOR A
TWENTY TWO BUDGET BUT IN
PROPOSED FISCAL YEAR TWENTY
ADDITION TO FUTURE BUDGETS THAT
TWENTY TWO BUDGET BUT IN
THE USE FOR SUCH PURPOSES
ADDITION TO FUTURE BUDGETS THAT
SPECIFICALLY BE RELATED TO
THE USE FOR SUCH PURPOSES
RESTORE AND ALTERNATIVE
SPECIFICALLY BE RELATED TO
STRATEGIES FOR PUBLIC SAFETY
RESTORE AND ALTERNATIVE
AND COMMUNITY SUPPORT SUCH AS
STRATEGIES FOR PUBLIC SAFETY
AND THERE&apos;S A FEW THINGS LISTED
AND COMMUNITY SUPPORT SUCH AS
IN THERE&apos;S FOUR BULLET POINTS
AND THERE&apos;S A FEW THINGS LISTED
AND SO I&apos;M THINKING THAT THOSE
IN THERE&apos;S FOUR BULLET POINTS
ARE SOME THINGS SUCH AS
AND SO I&apos;M THINKING THAT THOSE
PROGRAMS FOR AT RISK YOUTH
ARE SOME THINGS SUCH AS
EMERGENCY RESPONSE FOR MENTAL
PROGRAMS FOR AT RISK YOUTH
HEALTH AND OR SUBSTANCE USE AND
EMERGENCY RESPONSE FOR MENTAL
I KNOW I DON&apos;T KNOW HOW MUCH
HEALTH AND OR SUBSTANCE USE AND
OF THAT&apos;S AVAILABLE NOW.
I KNOW I DON&apos;T KNOW HOW MUCH
&gt;&gt; SO I&apos;M WONDERING IS THERE
OF THAT&apos;S AVAILABLE NOW.
MORE DISCUSSION WE WANT TO HAVE
&gt;&gt; SO I&apos;M WONDERING IS THERE
ON THIS?
MORE DISCUSSION WE WANT TO HAVE
&gt;&gt; THIS SEEMS LIKE A LOT IT
ON THIS?
SEEMS LIKE A LOT AND PART
&gt;&gt; THIS SEEMS LIKE A LOT IT
OF THE THING AND WE&apos;LL SEND
SEEMS LIKE A LOT AND PART
THIS TO EVERYBODY IS THAT THE
OF THE THING AND WE&apos;LL SEND
CITY ADMINISTRATOR HAS I THINK
THIS TO EVERYBODY IS THAT THE
LEAD IT MAYBE AROUND THE THIRD
CITY ADMINISTRATOR HAS I THINK
WEEK OF MARCH THE CITY BECAME
LEAD IT MAYBE AROUND THE THIRD
AWARE THAT THEY WOULD RECEIVE
WEEK OF MARCH THE CITY BECAME
MORE EXCISE TAX.
AWARE THAT THEY WOULD RECEIVE
UNSURPRISINGLY, IT SOLD MORE
MORE EXCISE TAX.
MARIJUANA IN ANN ARBOR THAN WAS
UNSURPRISINGLY, IT SOLD MORE
EXPECTED MAYBE MAYBE NOT MORE
MARIJUANA IN ANN ARBOR THAN WAS
THAN WAS EXPECTED.
EXPECTED MAYBE MAYBE NOT MORE
WE SHOULD HAVE EXPECTED MORE
THAN WAS EXPECTED.
BUT THERE&apos;S AN ADDITIONAL NINE
WE SHOULD HAVE EXPECTED MORE
HUNDRED THIRTY FIVE THREE THREE
BUT THERE&apos;S AN ADDITIONAL NINE
HUNDRED AND THIRTY SIX DOLLARS
HUNDRED THIRTY FIVE THREE THREE
THAT NOW COULD BE SPENT.
HUNDRED AND THIRTY SIX DOLLARS
AND SO THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR
THAT NOW COULD BE SPENT.
HAS MADE A RECOMMENDATION ON
AND SO THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR
HOW TO SPEND THAT AND I THINK
HAS MADE A RECOMMENDATION ON
ONE OF THE QUESTIONS IS DOES
HOW TO SPEND THAT AND I THINK
THAT REALLY ADDRESS THE SPIRIT
ONE OF THE QUESTIONS IS DOES
OF THE RESOLUTION TWENTY ONE
THAT REALLY ADDRESS THE SPIRIT
ZERO NINETY EIGHT THAT MR.
OF THE RESOLUTION TWENTY ONE
DOYLE HARGRAVES MENTIONED AND
ZERO NINETY EIGHT THAT MR.
COUNCIL MEMBER ROLLAWAY WELL
DOYLE HARGRAVES MENTIONED AND
THANK YOU.
COUNCIL MEMBER ROLLAWAY WELL
AND JUST BASED ON SOME OF THE
THANK YOU.
INFORMATION WE JUST HEARD,
AND JUST BASED ON SOME OF THE
THERE&apos;S ACTUALLY MORE THAN 930
INFORMATION WE JUST HEARD,
SIX NINE THIRTY SIX DEDUCTED
THERE&apos;S ACTUALLY MORE THAN 930
THE FOUR HUNDRED AND EIGHTY
SIX NINE THIRTY SIX DEDUCTED
THOUSAND DOLLARS TO FUND THE
THE FOUR HUNDRED AND EIGHTY
PROGRAM AT MISLAY JUST
THOUSAND DOLLARS TO FUND THE
DESCRIBED SO THERE ISN&apos;T THERE
PROGRAM AT MISLAY JUST
IS A FULL ONE POINT FOUR
DESCRIBED SO THERE ISN&apos;T THERE
MILLION DOLLARS THIS YEAR
IS A FULL ONE POINT FOUR
COMING IN.
MILLION DOLLARS THIS YEAR
THAT&apos;S SIGNED AND INITIALLY IT
COMING IN.
WAS TOLD THERE WAS ONLY NINE
THAT&apos;S SIGNED AND INITIALLY IT
936 BECAUSE OF THE DOUBLE
WAS TOLD THERE WAS ONLY NINE
DIPPING IN THE PRIOR PROGRAMS
936 BECAUSE OF THE DOUBLE
THAT WERE FUNDED LAST YEAR.
DIPPING IN THE PRIOR PROGRAMS
BUT THOSE AGAIN ARE FOR TWO
THAT WERE FUNDED LAST YEAR.
YEARS.
BUT THOSE AGAIN ARE FOR TWO
I HAD BROUGHT FORWARD A BUDGET
YEARS.
AMENDMENT WHEN THEY CAME TO
I HAD BROUGHT FORWARD A BUDGET
PRESCRIBING THE ARPA FUNDING
AMENDMENT WHEN THEY CAME TO
WHERE I WOULD HAVE WHERE I
PRESCRIBING THE ARPA FUNDING
WANTED TO START ASSIGNING THIS
WHERE I WOULD HAVE WHERE I
MARIJUANA EXCISE TAX TO THE
WANTED TO START ASSIGNING THIS
UNARMED RESPONSE PROGRAM THAT
MARIJUANA EXCISE TAX TO THE
DID NOT GET COUNCIL SUPPORT.
UNARMED RESPONSE PROGRAM THAT
THAT WAS IT WAS CREATIVE
DID NOT GET COUNCIL SUPPORT.
ACCOUNTING AND THE FACT THAT I
THAT WAS IT WAS CREATIVE
JUST WANTED TO PUT MORE MONEY
ACCOUNTING AND THE FACT THAT I
TOWARDS COORDINATED FUNDING
JUST WANTED TO PUT MORE MONEY
FROM THE RPA AND THEN USE THE
TOWARDS COORDINATED FUNDING
MARIJUANA MONEY TO FILL THAT
FROM THE RPA AND THEN USE THE
GAP THAT WE WOULD HAVE
MARIJUANA MONEY TO FILL THAT
CREATED BY DOING SO AND THEN
GAP THAT WE WOULD HAVE
START THE PROCESS AND START THE
CREATED BY DOING SO AND THEN
TRADITION OF FUNDING THE AN
START THE PROCESS AND START THE
ARMED RESPONSE.
TRADITION OF FUNDING THE AN
AS WE KNOW THE UNEARNED
ARMED RESPONSE.
RESPONSE IS ALWAYS GOING TO BE
AS WE KNOW THE UNEARNED
FUNDED FOR TWO YEARS WITH THE
RESPONSE IS ALWAYS GOING TO BE
ARPA MONEY.
FUNDED FOR TWO YEARS WITH THE
SO I JUST WANT TO MAKE IT CLEAR
ARPA MONEY.
TO QUITE A BIT OF MONEY AND THE
SO I JUST WANT TO MAKE IT CLEAR
PRESCRIPTION TO USE THAT MONEY.
TO QUITE A BIT OF MONEY AND THE
I DON&apos;T BELIEVE FOLLOWS THE
PRESCRIPTION TO USE THAT MONEY.
SPIRIT AND INTENT OF THE
I DON&apos;T BELIEVE FOLLOWS THE
RESOLUTION THAT THE VICE CHAIR
SPIRIT AND INTENT OF THE
JUST JUST DESCRIBED OUTLINED.
RESOLUTION THAT THE VICE CHAIR
SO I URGE THIS COMMISSION AND
JUST JUST DESCRIBED OUTLINED.
OTHERS IN THE COMMUNITY TO MAKE
SO I URGE THIS COMMISSION AND
SURE THE COUNCIL SPENDS THAT
OTHERS IN THE COMMUNITY TO MAKE
MONEY.
SURE THE COUNCIL SPENDS THAT
HAS IT WAS APPROVED BY THE SAME
MONEY.
COUNCIL?
HAS IT WAS APPROVED BY THE SAME
THIS ISN&apos;T A RESOLUTION THAT
COUNCIL?
WAS PASSED BY ANY OTHER COUNCIL
THIS ISN&apos;T A RESOLUTION THAT
THAN THE ONE THAT&apos;S SITTING
WAS PASSED BY ANY OTHER COUNCIL
THERE TODAY.
THAN THE ONE THAT&apos;S SITTING
SO HOPEFULLY THIS RECIPE IS
THERE TODAY.
FOLLOWED AND THOSE MONIES ARE
SO HOPEFULLY THIS RECIPE IS
USED FOR THESE TYPES
FOLLOWED AND THOSE MONIES ARE
OF PROGRAMS
, KINDS
OF OVERSIGHT.
&gt;&gt; I THINK IT MIGHT BE HARD FOR
FOLKS TO FOLLOW SOME OF OUR
CONVERSATIONS.
SO WHAT WE&apos;RE REFERENCING IS A
MEMO THAT OUR CITY
ADMINISTRATOR HAD TO PUBLISH
AND HIS RECOMMENDATIONS TO USE
THIS MONEY.
IT WAS A SERIES
OF RECOMMENDATIONS ACROSS
REQUESTS FROM THROUGHOUT
DIFFERENT DEPARTMENTS.
BUT HIS RECOMMENDATIONS CAME TO
THE FOLLOWING ONE HUNDRED ONE
HUNDRED THOUSAND FOR PUBLIC
WORKS APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM.
THIS WOULD BE FOR ENTRY LEVEL
PUBLIC WORKS POSITIONS, NOTABLY
WORKING WITH YOUTH 100000 FOR
UTILITY SUPPORT FOR RESIDENTS
IN NEED AND THAT&apos;S VIA BARRIER
BUSTERS 700000 FOR LOW INCOME
SUSTAINABILITY GRANT THAT&apos;S TO
HELP RESIDENTS PAY FOR HOME
IMPROVEMENTS SO HOMES ARE
HEALTHIER, MORE COMFORTABLE AND
MORE SUSTAINABLE AND THIRTY
FIVE THOUSAND THREE HUNDRED
SIXTY SIX FOR A BACKPACK OR
SCHOOL SUPPLIES FOR FAMILIES IN
NEED.
SO IF THE ISSUE IS THAT THE
THOSE BUCKETS ARE IN QUESTION
AS TO WHETHER THEY MEET THE
NEEDS OF THOSE MOST AFFECTED BY
THE WAR ON DRUGS, I THINK
THAT&apos;S DEFINITELY SOMETHING
THAT COUNCIL YOU KNOW, WITHIN
OUR AUTHORITY AND ABILITIES TO
QUESTION AND MAKE AMENDMENTS.
BUT I HAVE TO I HAVE TO SAY I
THINK THAT THE DISCUSSION IN
THE ARPA FUNDING AND THAT VOTE
CAME BEFORE THIS MEMO WAS
ISSUED.
SO THIS WAS THIS IS A RESULT
OF STAFF&apos;S WORK AND REACHING
OUT TO COMMUNITY TO UNDERSTAND
WHAT THE NEEDS ARE.
AND I&apos;M GLAD WE HAVE THIS TO
CONSIDER NOW.
AND IF WE IF WE HAVE MORE
CREATIVE THOUGHTS AROUND THAT,
MAYBE WE CAN TALK ABOUT IT HERE
.
SO IF WE HAVE QUESTIONS ABOUT
THOSE RECOMMENDATIONS, COUNCIL
MEMBERS, HOW DO WE GET THOSE
ANSWERED?
WHAT&apos;S THE WHAT DO YOU THINK
THE BEST OPTION FOR US IS LIKE?
FOR INSTANCE, I HAVE A QUESTION
I&apos;M INTERESTED IN LIKE HOW MANY
HOUSEHOLD WOULD BE WOULD BE
TARGETED FOR THE LOW INCOME
SUSTAINABILITY GRANTS?
HOW MANY LOW-INCOME HOMEOWNERS
DO WE ACTUALLY HAVE IN ANN
ARBOR?
THOSE KINDS OF QUESTIONS I&apos;M
LOOKING I&apos;M TRYING TO LOOK
THROUGH THE MEMO FOR THE EXACT
NUMBER.
LET&apos;S SEE THE INITIAL THE
INITIAL REQUEST WAS FOR A FIVE
HUNDRED TWO MILLION FIVE
HUNDRED THOUSAND TO A MILLION
DIDN&apos;T GIVE A NUMBER
OF RESIDENCE OR HOMES BUT MR
TONY CAME TO 700000 AS THE
FINAL RECOMMENDATION.
&gt;&gt; BUT IF YOU WANT MORE DETAILS
I GUESS I WOULD SUGGEST JUST
EMAILING ALL OF COUNCIL AND MR.
TONY SO THAT WE&apos;RE ALL ON THE
SAME PAGE AS TO UNDERSTANDING
WHAT THE THE QUESTIONS ARE
COMING FROM COMMUNITY.
I MEAN ODDS ARE COUNCIL MEMBERS
HAVE THE SAME QUESTIONS TO SO
INSTEAD OF WAITING FOR US TO
ASK AND HAVING THAT PUBLISHED
OUT OR DISCUSSING COUNCIL
MEETING, YOU MIGHT AS WELL JUST
EMAIL US NOW.
I MEAN WE&apos;RE GETTING QUESTIONS
ON DIFFERENT ISSUES THAT ARE
THAT HAVE BEEN BROUGHT UP IN
THE PAST IN PREVIOUS BUDGETS
AND NO ONE&apos;S REALLY WAITING FOR
PERMISSION TO EMAIL ALL
OF COUNCIL ON THE ON THAT
.
&gt;&gt; IF I CAN ADD A LITTLE BIT TO
YOUR HEAD, I THINK THE
QUESTIONS SHOULD BE MORE DIRECT
A I THINK IF YOU SEND IT OUT TO
ALL OF COUNCIL FIRST IT&apos;S WE&apos;RE
NOT GOING TO BE ABLE TO RESPOND
TO THAT MAYBE
DEFINITELY NOT
REPLY ALL WE&apos;RE GOING TO BE
VIOLATING MAY I THINK MARTY
PACHON AND JOHN FORNIER MILTON
TONY ARE REALLY SOME OF THE
MORE DIRECT FOLKS YOU CAN TALK
TO MRS. STULTZ IN THE
SUSTAINABILITY OFFICE.
I QUITE WELL I WAS QUITE
SHOCKED AT THAT RECOMMENDATION
ON HOW TO SPEND THIS NINE
THIRTY SIX EXPRESSED MY SHOCK
UH TO THE FOLKS BECAUSE AGAIN I
DID NOT SEE HOW THAT CORRELATED
WITH THE RESOLUTION THAT WAS
PASSED IN MARCH OF TWENTY
TWENTY ONE.
I THINK YOU NEED TO HAVE A VERY
ACTIVE IMAGINATION TO DRAW
THOSE LINES AND I&apos;LL JUST LEAVE
IT THERE.
THANK YOU.
SO GO AHEAD.
I GUESS MY NEXT QUESTION IS IS
HOW HOW IN THE WEEDS DO WE WANT
TO GET AS COMMISSION ON THIS?
IS THIS SOMETHING WE WANT TO
ASK QUESTIONS ON?
LEAP TO STAFF?
IS THIS SOMETHING WE WANT TO
OH, I THINK IT&apos;S ALWAYS FAIR
LEAP TO STAFF?
FOR US TO ASK QUESTIONS.
OH, I THINK IT&apos;S ALWAYS FAIR
I THINK WHEN THIS WAS BROUGHT
FOR US TO ASK QUESTIONS.
UP A YEAR OR SO AGO THERE WAS A
I THINK WHEN THIS WAS BROUGHT
CONVERSATION BROUGHT TO THIS
UP A YEAR OR SO AGO THERE WAS A
BODY ABOUT THE INTENT OF THOSE
CONVERSATION BROUGHT TO THIS
OF THE MONEY THAT WOULD BE
BODY ABOUT THE INTENT OF THOSE
RECEIVED FROM TAXING MARIJUANA
OF THE MONEY THAT WOULD BE
AND THAT ITS INTENT WAS TO BE
RECEIVED FROM TAXING MARIJUANA
USED FOR PEOPLE MOST HARMED.
AND THAT ITS INTENT WAS TO BE
YOU BY THE QUOTE UNQUOTE WAR ON
USED FOR PEOPLE MOST HARMED.
DRUGS OR PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN
YOU BY THE QUOTE UNQUOTE WAR ON
MOST HARMED BY THE KIND
DRUGS OR PEOPLE WHO HAVE BEEN
OF POLICIES THAT EXISTED.
MOST HARMED BY THE KIND
AND SO I THINK IT IS FAIR FOR
OF POLICIES THAT EXISTED.
US TO DISCUSS IT WAS BROUGHT TO
AND SO I THINK IT IS FAIR FOR
US.
US TO DISCUSS IT WAS BROUGHT TO
&gt;&gt; COMMISSIONER OTHMAN, I WOULD
US.
LIKE TO SEE A PART OF THE MONEY
&gt;&gt; COMMISSIONER OTHMAN, I WOULD
BEING USED TO GIVE SOME KIND
LIKE TO SEE A PART OF THE MONEY
OF SCHOLARSHIPS TO INDIVIDUALS
BEING USED TO GIVE SOME KIND
WHO ARE NOT IN A FINANCIAL
OF SCHOLARSHIPS TO INDIVIDUALS
SITUATION WHERE THEY CAN AFFORD
WHO ARE NOT IN A FINANCIAL
GOING TO DRIVING SCHOOL BECAUSE
SITUATION WHERE THEY CAN AFFORD
SOMETIMES WHAT THEY DO THE KIDS
GOING TO DRIVING SCHOOL BECAUSE
IS THEY TRY TO PROBABLY DO
SOMETIMES WHAT THEY DO THE KIDS
THINGS ON THEIR OWN AND THEN
IS THEY TRY TO PROBABLY DO
THERE WILL BE COURT THEY WILL
THINGS ON THEIR OWN AND THEN
BE APPREHENDED BY THE POLICE
THERE WILL BE COURT THEY WILL
THEN THE CYCLE WILL START.
BE APPREHENDED BY THE POLICE
SO IF WE HAVE SOME KIND
THEN THE CYCLE WILL START.
OF PROACTIVE PROGRAM WHERE WE
SO IF WE HAVE SOME KIND
IDENTIFY INDIVIDUALS WHO MIGHT
OF PROACTIVE PROGRAM WHERE WE
BENEFIT FROM DRIVING, YOU KNOW,
IDENTIFY INDIVIDUALS WHO MIGHT
PAY FOR DRIVING LESSONS AND GET
BENEFIT FROM DRIVING, YOU KNOW,
THE LICENSE AND A LEGAL WAY
PAY FOR DRIVING LESSONS AND GET
THAT ALSO WOULD BE ONE WAY
THE LICENSE AND A LEGAL WAY
OF USING SOME OF THAT MONEY TO
THAT ALSO WOULD BE ONE WAY
LIKE INSTEAD OF THE KIDS GO
OF USING SOME OF THAT MONEY TO
INTO THE LEGAL SYSTEM OF THE
LIKE INSTEAD OF THE KIDS GO
COURT AND YOU KNOW, START THIS
INTO THE LEGAL SYSTEM OF THE
RABBIT HOLE KIND OF THING IF WE
COURT AND YOU KNOW, START THIS
HAVE SOME OF THAT MONEY TO
RABBIT HOLE KIND OF THING IF WE
SUPPORT THOSE INDIVIDUALS WHO
HAVE SOME OF THAT MONEY TO
MIGHT NOT BE ABLE ON THEIR OWN
SUPPORT THOSE INDIVIDUALS WHO
TO DO THE RIGHT THING BY PAYING
MIGHT NOT BE ABLE ON THEIR OWN
FOR DRIVING SCHOOL AND LICENSE
TO DO THE RIGHT THING BY PAYING
AND THAT SHOULD BE PART OF YOU
FOR DRIVING SCHOOL AND LICENSE
KNOW, I DON&apos;T KNOW HOW MANY
AND THAT SHOULD BE PART OF YOU
OF THE INDIVIDUALS WHO HAD
KNOW, I DON&apos;T KNOW HOW MANY
SERVED WITH WITH THE DIVERSION
OF THE INDIVIDUALS WHO HAD
THAT WOULD WOULD BENEFIT FROM
SERVED WITH WITH THE DIVERSION
THIS MOST OF THE FOLKS WHO CAME
THAT WOULD WOULD BENEFIT FROM
INTO OUR COURT THAT HAD DRIVING
THIS MOST OF THE FOLKS WHO CAME
WITH LICENSE SUSPENDED CHARGES.
INTO OUR COURT THAT HAD DRIVING
THE GOAL IS TO HELP THEM BECOME
WITH LICENSE SUSPENDED CHARGES.
LICENSED DRIVERS AND THEY DID
THE GOAL IS TO HELP THEM BECOME
NOT GET SENT NECESSARILY INTO
LICENSED DRIVERS AND THEY DID
THE DIVERSION PROGRAM BECAUSE
NOT GET SENT NECESSARILY INTO
UNLESS THEY HAD EXTENUATING
THE DIVERSION PROGRAM BECAUSE
CIRCUMSTANCES WHERE THEY NEEDED
UNLESS THEY HAD EXTENUATING
THE ASSISTANCE OF THE SOCIAL
CIRCUMSTANCES WHERE THEY NEEDED
WORKER AND THEY WERE JUST
THE ASSISTANCE OF THE SOCIAL
WORKING ON, YOU KNOW, MAYBE
WORKER AND THEY WERE JUST
TAKING A TEST OR GETTING IN
WORKING ON, YOU KNOW, MAYBE
THOSE LOGGING IN THOSE HOURS
TAKING A TEST OR GETTING IN
THINGS THAT NATURE IF THEY HAD
THOSE LOGGING IN THOSE HOURS
A COMPANION CIVIL INFRACTION I
THINGS THAT NATURE IF THEY HAD
DISMISSED IT ONCE THEY CAME UP
A COMPANION CIVIL INFRACTION I
WITH THEIR OBLIGATION.
DISMISSED IT ONCE THEY CAME UP
SO WE PROBABLY HAVE AT LEAST SO
WITH THEIR OBLIGATION.
CLOSE TO ONE HUNDRED PEOPLE
SO WE PROBABLY HAVE AT LEAST SO
THAT ARE NOT ACCOUNTED FOR IN
CLOSE TO ONE HUNDRED PEOPLE
THE DRIVER&apos;S LICENSE SUSPENDED.
THAT ARE NOT ACCOUNTED FOR IN
I DID NOT TAKE THE RESOURCES
THE DRIVER&apos;S LICENSE SUSPENDED.
OF THOSE WHO NEEDED MORE CASE
I DID NOT TAKE THE RESOURCES
MANAGEMENT SERVICES ON THINGS
OF THOSE WHO NEEDED MORE CASE
THAT I COULD HANDLE DURING THE
MANAGEMENT SERVICES ON THINGS
AT THE SHERIFF&apos;S DEPARTMENT
THAT I COULD HANDLE DURING THE
DOES HAVE A HAVE A COMMUNITY
AT THE SHERIFF&apos;S DEPARTMENT
PARTNERSHIP TO PAY FOR DRIVING
DOES HAVE A HAVE A COMMUNITY
SCHOOL FOR OUR YOUNG FOLKS AS
PARTNERSHIP TO PAY FOR DRIVING
WELL.
SCHOOL FOR OUR YOUNG FOLKS AS
AND IT&apos;S BEEN IT&apos;S NOW FUNDED
WELL.
AGAIN I THINK FOR ANOTHER YEAR
AND IT&apos;S BEEN IT&apos;S NOW FUNDED
AND IT&apos;S BEEN VERY SUCCESSFUL I
AGAIN I THINK FOR ANOTHER YEAR
BELIEVE KATHY FROM THE
AND IT&apos;S BEEN VERY SUCCESSFUL I
SHERIFF&apos;S DEPARTMENT WAS PRETTY
BELIEVE KATHY FROM THE
INSTRUMENTAL IN BRINGING THAT
SHERIFF&apos;S DEPARTMENT WAS PRETTY
TO THE COMMUNITY.
INSTRUMENTAL IN BRINGING THAT
THANK YOU
.
&gt;&gt; ANY ANY MORE THOUGHTS?
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M ON A I&apos;M I JUST SENT YOU
GUYS THE DOCUMENT THAT DETAILS
THE PROPOSAL ON THE TABLE FROM
THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR IN TERMS
OF HOW PART OF THOSE FUNDS ARE
TO BE SPENT AND SO WE CAN
CERTAINLY HAVE A DISCUSSION
ABOUT THAT AND BRING THAT BACK
TO COUNCIL OR ASK THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR ANY QUESTIONS.
&gt;&gt; I WAS ABLE TO ASK A COUPLE
OF QUESTIONS ABOUT IT AND HE
WAS REALLY QUICK TO REPLY SO
WE&apos;VE HAD SOME BACK AND FORTH
ON THAT ALREADY AND WE CAN
CONTINUE TO ASK QUESTIONS OF IT
AND ASK OUR COUNCIL LIAISONS
ABOUT IT.
OK, CAN I JUST READ THIS SO ONE
OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS IS ONE
HUNDRED THOUSAND FOR BARRIER
BUSTERS FOR FOLKS WHO DON&apos;T WHO
ARE UNAWARE OF BARRIER BUSTERS
IN THEIR WORK.
LET ME JUST READ WHAT MR. TONY
HAD RECOMMENDED.
BARRIER BUSTERS IS A GROUP
OF 100 PLUS SOCIAL SERVICE
AGENCIES COMMITTED TO IMPROVING
SERVICES AND RESPONDING TO
EMERGENCIES FOR WASHOE COUNTY
RESIDENTS NEED COUNTY
WASHINGTON COUNTY IN AN
EFFICIENT WAY TO PREVENT
EVICTIONS, UTILITY SHUTOFFS AND
ASSIST WITH OTHER EMERGENCY
COSTS THAT THREATEN RESIDENTS
HOUSING AND FINANCIAL STABILITY
.
RESIDENTS IN NEED WORK WITH
THEIR EXISTING PROVIDER TECHS
TO ACCESS FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE.
THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR BERRIER
BUSTERS FUNDS PROVIDES
ASSISTANCE TO RESIDENTS WHO MAY
BE IN NEED OF UTILITY BILL
SUPPORT.
AS AN EXAMPLE IN THE 2021
ANNUAL REPORT 132 INNER CITY
FAMILIES RECEIVED ASSISTANCE
AND THE AMOUNT OF EIGHTY SEVEN
THOUSAND DOLLARS WELL EXCEEDING
THE CITY ALLOCATIONS IN 2021.
THIS WAS FUNDED BY VOLUNTARY
CONTRIBUTIONS FROM RESIDENTS
WHO ROUND UP THEIR FEES FROM
UTILITY SERVICES.
THESE VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS
TYPICALLY ADD UP TO BETWEEN 10
AND 15 K PER YEAR FOR THIS
PROGRAM.
SO THIS IS THE GENEROSITY
OF OUR CITY WHO BELIEVES IN THE
INVESTMENT OF CARING FOR FOR
COMMUNITY FELLOW COMMUNITY
MEMBERS.
IT&apos;S ANTICIPATED THAT REQUESTS
FROM CITY OF ANN ARBOR
RESIDENTS WILL LIKELY EXCEED
120000 IN 2022.
SO WHAT HE&apos;S SAYING IS THAT
THERE&apos;S THIS EXISTING PROGRAM
EXISTING NEED WE KNOW WILL
INCREASE EVEN THOUGH RESIDENTS
ARE, YOU KNOW, INCREASING THEIR
OWN UTILITY BILLS TO ASSIST OUR
NEIGHBORS, THERE&apos;S STILL AN
OPPORTUNITY TO USE THIS MONEY
TO I MEAN WHEN WE TALK ABOUT
THE COMMUNITIES MOST IMPACTED
BY THE WAR ON DRUGS, WE KNOW
WE&apos;RE TALKING ABOUT FOLKS
WHO&apos;VE BEEN INCARCERATED AND
THOSE COULD BE THE MAIN
PROVIDERS FOR FAMILIES.
SO WHEN YOU&apos;RE BEHIND A UTILITY
AND RENT AND AROUND THE RISK
OF EVICTION, BURGER BUSTERS CAN
REALLY KEEP YOU FROM LOSING
YOUR HOME AND CARING FOR YOUR
FAMILY.
I FEEL LIKE IF IF THE OTHER
ALLOCATIONS ARE IN QUESTION, I
HOPE THAT THIS ONE IS NOT IT&apos;S
DIFFICULT TO GET THIS MONEY FOR
BARRIER BUSTERS.
WE HAVEN&apos;T HAD ONE EMPLOYEE
HERE WHO CAN PROBABLY SPEAK TO
CASES WHERE WE SEE THIS IN
ACTION IN COMMUNITY.
SO THAT&apos;S WHEN I WILL STRONGLY
ADVOCATE TO KEEP AND BARRY,
THIS IS A PROJECT OF THE
WASHINGTON COUNTY COMMUNITY AND
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AGENCY AND
YOU GUYS CAN IT&apos;S JUST
WASHTENAW DOGBERRY BUSTERS AND
SO YOU CAN READ MORE
INFORMATION ABOUT WHAT THEY DO.
I THINK I THINK ONE OF THE
QUESTIONS TOO WAS HOW MANY
PEOPLE WAS THAT EXPECTED TO
SERVE THAT KIND OF THING, HOW
BIG THE GRANTS ARE.
I&apos;VE HEARD DIFFERENT THINGS
ABOUT HOW THE HOW BIG A GRANTS
CAN BE AND SO HOW MANY PEOPLE
THAT WOULD HELP COMMISSIONER
J&apos;ADORE HARGREAVES, DID YOU
HAVE A QUESTION?
NO.
OK, THANK SO I THINK IT&apos;S I
THINK IT&apos;S WORTHY OF HAVING A
CONVERSATION.
&gt;&gt; IT JUST YOU KNOW, YOU GUYS
SORT OF PONDERING WHAT&apos;S THERE
AND I&apos;VE SAID YOU ALL THE MEMO
AND YOU KNOW HOW TO LOOK YOU
KNOW THE DIFFERENT THINGS TO
WHICH ALLOCATIONS HAVE BEEN
MADE AND THEN FOR US TO PONDER,
YOU KNOW, WHETHER THAT&apos;S REALLY
IN THE SPIRIT OF THE YOU KNOW,
THE THE THE EXCISE TAX MONEY,
ALL OF THIS REVENUE YOU KNOW,
WE&apos;VE SEEN THAT ALL ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
&gt;&gt; YOU KNOW, PEOPLE TRY TO USE
THIS MONEY FOR IN DIFFERENT
WAYS WHEN IT FIRST HAPPENED IN
COLORADO AND THE SOCIAL
SERVICES THAT THEY PROVIDED AND
STATE AFTER STATE AFTER STATE
AND WRESTLES WITH THESE THINGS.
HOW DO WE SPEND THIS EXTRA, YOU
KNOW, REVENUE THAT WE HAD NOT
NECESSARILY ANTICIPATE IT.
AND SO I THINK THOSE
CONVERSATIONS ARE IMPORTANT AND
THEY&apos;RE ONGOING AND THEY&apos;RE
EVOLVING AND SO THEY&apos;RE
IMPORTANT TO THINK ABOUT.
SHALL WE MOVE ON?
THE NEXT ITEM ON THE AGENDA
WILL BE REALLY QUICK.
WE WERE JUST GOING TO ASK ABOUT
THE REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS FOR
THE COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
SERVICES AND THAT WAS JUST WE
HAD TALKED TO THE CITY
ILLUSTRATOR.
AS YOU ALL KNOW, THERE WAS A
RESOLUTION IN TWENTY TWENTY ONE
IN APRIL THAT THE CITY EXPLORE
WHETHER AN UNARMED RESPONSE
PROGRAM WAS POSSIBLE OR NOT AND
THAT A PARK WAS TO BE CONSULTED
.
THAT AND ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
WAS VERY IMPORTANT TO THIS BODY
WAS THAT THERE BE COMMUNITY
OUTREACH BY THE CITY TO ASK THE
CITIZENS WHAT THEY MIGHT WANT
IN ON OUR RESPONSE PROGRAM AND
TO ASK PEOPLE WHO ARE NOT
GENERALLY INCLUDED IN THAT
PROCESS AND SO WE CAN&apos;T DO THE
USUAL ZOOME MEETING WHERE
EVERYONE&apos;S INTERNET ACCESS HIGH
SPEED INTERNET LOGS ON AND
GIVES THEIR THOUGHTS ABOUT HOW
THEY WANT TO SPEND OUR MONEY
THAT THAT KIND OF PROCESS IS IT
GOING TO WORK?
DO WE HAVE TO REACH PEOPLE WHO
ARE TYPICALLY DISENGAGED FROM
THE POLITICAL PROCESS WHO FEEL
DISENFRANCHIZED BY IT, WHO ARE
MOST LIKELY TO BE IMPACTED BY
ANONYMOUS THIS PROGRAM THE CITY
YOU KNOW FAIRLY SAID THEY
DIDN&apos;T THINK THEY COULD DO
IT
AND SO THEY PUT OUT AN RFP FOR
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT PROCESS.
THEY&apos;RE IN THE PROCESS OF I
THINK THEY GOT FOUR
APPLICATIONS.
THEY&apos;VE NARROWED IT DOWN TO TWO
AND NOW THEY&apos;RE IN THE PROCESS
OF DECIDING BETWEEN TWO
DIFFERENT FIRMS WHO RUN THAT
OUTREACH IN THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR.
&gt;&gt; AND SO MY QUESTION IS WHAT&apos;S
GOING ON WITH THAT?
AND THEN I GOT AN ANSWER TODAY
SO WE COULD HAVE TAKEN OFF THE
AGENDA AND COULD HAVE JUST TOLD
YOU GUYS BUT OH WELL SO MOVING
ON, ARE THERE ANY REPORTS FROM
COMMITTEES?
&gt;&gt; I APOLOGIZE.
WE ADDED SOMETHING TO THE
BUDGET AND I JUST IGNORED THAT.
WE WERE GOING TO ASK ABOUT THE
AND I WERE POLICE DEPARTMENT
BUDGET.
DO YOU WANT TO HANDLE THAT PART
?
&gt;&gt; SO I KNOW THE BUDGETS WERE
PRESENTED EARLIER AND TODAY A
QUESTION CAME UP OF HOW PARK
WAS GOING TO BE EVALUATING THE
POLICE BUDGET.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;LL BE UP TO US TO GO
THROUGH IT AND THEN PRESENT
QUESTIONS TO THE POLICE CHIEF
AND CITY ADMINISTRATOR ONLY IF
WE HAVE ANY QUESTIONS.
I HAVE NOT SEEN YET.
I DON&apos;T KNOW IF ANYBODY ELSE
HAS REVIEWED IT BUT WE&apos;LL NEED
TO.
&gt;&gt; DENISE, ARE YOU ABLE TO GET
THAT FOR US THAT YOU COULD SEND
THAT TO ALL OF US?
THE POLICE BUDGET THERE ARE
TENTATIVE PROPOSED AND IN THAT
WE WILL BE ABLE TO GET
QUESTIONS AND HOPEFULLY ANSWERS
I BELIEVE IS COUNSEL GOING TO
BE VOTING ON THE BUDGET AT OR
MAY 16TH MEETING?
IS THAT CORRECT?
YES.
OK, I&apos;M SEEING NO SO ALL RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; RYAN, THE POLICE CHIEF HAS
TALKED ABOUT A NUMBER OF NEW
POSITIONS HE WANTS TO FILL AND
SO IT&apos;LL BE INTERESTING TO TO
LOOK AT THAT.
&gt;&gt; BUT THAT IS CERTAINLY PART
OF OUR RESPONSIBILITY TO DO
THAT AND TO MAKE SURE THAT
MAKES SENSE.
&gt;&gt; I JUST CHECK WILL IT BE
CONTEXT WITH THAT?
SO FOR INSTANCE, IF WE&apos;RE GOING
TO SEE THE PROPOSED TENTATIVE
FOR NEXT YEAR, WILL WE BE ABLE
TO SEE THIS YEAR&apos;S BUDGET AND
WHERE THERE WERE LARGE
VARIANCES IF WE&apos;RE JUST LOOKING
AT A PROPOSED BUDGET WE DO NOT
HAVE MUCH OF I KNOW THAT I
DON&apos;T HAVE ANY CONTEXT OR
INSIGHT FOR THAT SO I CAN I CAN
LOOK AT A NUMBER AND SAY THAT&apos;S
A HIGH NUMBER BUT I DON&apos;T KNOW
IF IT SHIFTED RELATIVE LARRY
LAST YEAR TO BE TO SEE WHERE
THINGS ARE CHANGING OR MOVING.
&gt;&gt; RIGHT.
AND THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR WILL
BE QUICK TO POINT OUT THAT
THERE ARE POLICE DON&apos;T HAVE A
BUDGET.
IT&apos;S PART OF THE GENERAL BUDGET
AND SO EVERYTHING IS KIND OF IN
ONE PART.
&gt;&gt; BUT I DO UNDERSTAND WHAT
YOU&apos;RE SAYING AND WE OUR BODY
HAS TO FILE QUARTERLY REPORTS
OR SOME AT SOME INTERVAL
REPORTS ABOUT HOW MUCH MONEY WE
SPEND OF WHAT WE THOUGHT WE
WERE GOING TO SPEND.
AND WE KNOW THAT THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT CERTAINLY DOES THAT
AS WELL SO THAT INFORMATION
SHOULD BE AVAILABLE EVEN THOUGH
IT IS NOT CONSIDERED A SEPARATE
BUDGET ITEM.
&gt;&gt; AND SO WE WOULD CERTAINLY
LIKE TO TAKE A LOOK AT THOSE
NUMBERS AND MAYBE SOME OF THE
INTERIM SORT OF SPENDING
INFORMATION IF WE CAN GET THAT
.
&gt;&gt; ANY OTHER THOUGHTS ON THAT?
SO WE&apos;LL GET THAT OUT TO YOU AS
SOON AS WE GET OUR HANDS ON IT.
AND IN ADDITION, IF WE CAN HAVE
SOME CONTEXT FOR IT THAT MAKES
SENSE AS COMMISSIONER WALTON
SAID, IT DOESN&apos;T REALLY HELP
THAT MUCH JUST TO SEE A BUNCH
OF NUMBERS.
IT DOESN&apos;T REALLY TELL YOU
ANYTHING UNLESS YOU HAVE SOME
CONTEXT FOR WHETHER THEY&apos;RE
INCREASED, DECREASED AND WHAT
THEY MEAN VIS A VIS SOMETHING
ELSE.
&gt;&gt; SO ALL RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; HAVING SAID THAT, ARE THERE
ANY REPORTS FROM ANY COMMITTEES
COMMUNICATIONS FROM INDIVIDUAL
COMMISSIONERS THAT THEY&apos;D LIKE
TO BRING FORWARD
SO WE HAVE AN
UPDATE ON COMPLAINTS REVIEW
PROCESS.
&gt;&gt; SO WE WE&apos;RE WE&apos;RE GOING
THROUGH THE PROCESS GETTING
THINGS EVALUATED.
&gt;&gt; I KNOW I WAS NOT ABLE TO
MAKE THE MOST RECENT MEETING
DUE TO A CONFLICT BUT
COMMISSIONER OTHMAN AND
COMMISSIONER CARTER MET WITH
THE DEPUTY CHIEFS TO GO THROUGH
SOME COMPLAINTS THAT WE&apos;RE
REVIEWING NOW.
SO WE&apos;RE GOING TO CONTINUE
THROUGH WE&apos;RE ALSO STILL
WORKING ON OUR WEBSITE SO THAT
COMPLAINTS WILL BE A LOG OR A
DASHBOARD WILL BE ON THE
WEBSITE.
SO WE&apos;RE JUST CONTINUING TO
WORK ON THAT.
WE&apos;LL TAKE THE NEXT ONE TO
UPDATE ON THE APRIA CONTRACT
DISCUSSIONS.
I DID MEET WITH THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR THERE, HONI
COUNCIL MEMBER SONG COUNCIL
MEMBER ONE LOUHI AND OTHER CITY
STAFF AND LAID OUT THE
CONVERSATION THAT WE HAD HERE
AT OUR LAST MEETING AND THREE
ITEMS THAT WE WANTED DISCUSSED
OR CLARIFIED AND THEY ARE GOING
TO BE KEEPING UPDATED ONCE THE
NEGOTIATION PROCESS IS
CONCLUDED ON WHERE IT ALL CAME
OUT.
AND AT THE TIME OF THAT MEETING
THE NEGOTIATIONS HAD NOT
STARTED YET.
I DON&apos;T KNOW IF THEY&apos;VE STARTED
SINCE THEN BUT AT THAT TIME WE
WERE BASICALLY PRESENTING OUR
THOUGHTS BEFORE NEGOTIATIONS
ACTUALLY STARTED TO SAY OK,
WE&apos;RE GOING TO MAKE ME
REMEMBER.
&gt;&gt; SO THE THREE THINGS WERE TWO
OF THEM WERE LEFT FROM THE
COUPLE OF YEARS AGO WHEN WE
WENT THROUGH THIS PROCESS WHICH
WAS THAT THE REFLECTION BACK IN
THE DISCIPLINARY RECORD WOULD
BE SEVEN YEARS IT ORIGINALLY
WAS TO AFTER THE LAST CONTRACT
IT WENT TO FOUR SO WE WOULD BE
LEAVING THAT WOULD BE LEFT ON
THE TABLE STILL TO BE SOMETHING
DISCUSSED TO BRING IT TO SEVEN
ANOTHER ITEM LEFT WAS THE
ELIMINATION OF ARBITRATION IN
THE CASE OF TERMINATION ONLY
ONLY SO NOT OVERALL DISCIPLINE,
JUST TERMINATION SO THAT IS
SOMETHING THAT WAS TALKED ABOUT
PREVIOUSLY ALSO THE THIRD ITEM
WAS I BELIEVE WE WERE WE HAD WE
WANTED TO BE ABLE TO CONFIRM
THAT CHIEF COX WOULD BE ABLE TO
REDISTRIBUTE OR REDEPLOY
OFFICERS AS NEEDED.
&gt;&gt; THAT WAS SOMETHING THAT
DIDN&apos;T HAPPEN BEFORE PREVIOUSLY
AND WE WANTED WE WEREN&apos;T SURE
HOW WE CAME OUT AT THE LAST
CONTRACT WITH THAT.
&gt;&gt; SO WE WANTED THAT CLARIFIED.
&gt;&gt; ALSO IN ARBOR HAS A REALLY
UNIQUE STRUCTURE.
THE UNION CONTRACT HAS BEEN
REALLY UNIQUE IN TERMS
OF CONTRACTS FROM ACROSS THE
COUNTRY AND THAT THE POLICE
CHIEF DID NOT NECESSARILY HAVE
AN ABILITY TO REASSIGN
PERSONNEL AT HIS DISCRETION TO
DO A DIFFERENT JOB AND YOU&apos;VE
HEARD PAST POLICE YOU TALK
ABOUT THAT AND HOW ODD IT IS IN
ANN ARBOR BUT IT&apos;S A THING
THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S EXISTED FOR SOME
TIME AND THUS YOU&apos;RE NOT
NECESSARILY ABLE TO LOOK AT
SOMEBODY&apos;S SKILLS AND DECIDE
THAT IT WOULD BE BETTER FIT
DOING SOMETHING ELSE.
AND THAT WAS SOMETHING THAT WE
HAD TALKED ABOUT IN THE LAST
CONTRACT AND SO THAT WAS
BROUGHT UP AGAIN.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU FOR DOING THAT.
NO ANY THOUGHTS QUESTIONS ABOUT
THAT NEGOTIATION PROCESS,
MISSION STATEMENT?
&gt;&gt; LOOK, NOT JUST FOLLOW UP ON
THE UPDATES ON THE COMPLAINTS
REVIEW.
WE MET WITH THE DEPUTY CHIEF
OF POLICE THE FIRST WEDNESDAY I
BELIEVE AND ONE OF THE ISSUES
THAT WE HAVE I THINK AT ONE
POINT WE WERE AS COMMISSION AND
MANAGERS WERE QUITE OPTIMISTIC
THAT WE WILL CONCLUDE THE
REVIEWING ALL THE CASES BY THE
END OF JUNE.
BUT I DON&apos;T SEE THAT THIS IS
GOING TO HAPPEN BECAUSE WE HAVE
ONLY RECEIVED DOCUMENTS AND
VIDEOS ON FEW CASES FROM TWENTY
TWENTY ONE AND TWENTY TWENTY
ONE THEY WERE THIRTY SEVEN
THIRTY SIX CASES AND I BELIEVE
THAT WE HAVE INFORMATION
DOCUMENTS ETC. ON UNDER TEN
OF THOSE ONES SO AND AT LEAST
OF THE CASES I REVIEWED THERE
WERE TWO CASES OR COMPLAINTS
THAT ONE HAD SEVEN VIDEOS AND
THE OTHER ONE HAD TEN AND IF
YOU LOOK AT THE TIME THAT IS
NEEDED THAT&apos;S PROBABLY WOULD BE
CLOSE TO OVER SEVEN OR SO HOURS
OF VIDEO TO REVIEW AND THERE
ARE SOME ISSUES WITH WHAT THE
REST IS LIKE WHEN WE ARE GOING
TO RECEIVE DOCUMENTATIONS ON
THE OTHER CASES.
YEAH, SO THAT WOULD REALLY SLOW
US DOWN IN TERMS OF REVIEWING
THE CASES.
SO I BELIEVE THAT THERE SHOULD
BE SOME KIND OF MECHANISM TO
ACCELERATE THE INFORMATION
COMING OUR WAY SO WE WILL HAVE
A CHANCE TO REVIEW THEM IN A
TIMELY FASHION AND REASONABLE
TIME.
&gt;&gt; YEAH SO THAT&apos;S ONE OF THE
INTERESTING THINGS ABOUT THE
ORDINANCE.
&gt;&gt; WE CAN REMIND THEM THAT THEY
MAY BE OUTSIDE OF THEIR THIRTY
DAY WINDOW BUT THERE&apos;S ACTUALLY
NO PUNISHMENT FOR THE POLICE IF
THEY IF THEY DON&apos;T COMPLY WITH
THAT.
&gt;&gt; SO WE CAN CERTAINLY REMIND
THEM OF THAT.
&gt;&gt; WE WE NEED TO GET THE
ASSIGNMENTS TO THE POLICE SO
THEY KNOW WHO TO GIVE THE CASES
TO.
&gt;&gt; OK, SO I&apos;LL SEND THAT NOW.
&gt;&gt; SURE.
AND I THINK AND AND AND FURTHER
IN THAT PROCESS WE HAVE HAD
EXTENSIVE DISCUSSIONS WITH THE
CITY ADMINISTRATOR REGARDING
OUR ABILITY TO SEE COMPLAINANT
NAMES AND SO WE&apos;RE HOPING TO
SEE SOME MOVEMENT IN THAT WAY
AS WELL
AS WELL AS A DIFFERENT
WAY OF DOCUMENTING THE OFFICERS
WHO ARE INVOLVED WHERE THAT WAS
DONE IN A REALLY THE THE
MECHANISM BY WHICH OFFICERS
NAMES WERE REVEALED TO US AND
THOSE ARE NOW REVEALED TO US
EVEN THOUGH WE DON&apos;T
NECESSARILY REVEAL THE
OFFICER&apos;S NAMES TO THE PUBLIC
DEPENDENT UPON THE CASES, IT
WAS NOT CLEAR WHICH OFFICER WAS
WHO.
WHEN YOU TRY TO MATCH THE
REPORTS TO UNIQUE IDENTIFIER
NUMBER AND SO WE&apos;VE ASKED THAT
THAT BE STREAMLINED AND THERE
WERE SOME RESISTANCE TO THAT.
BUT WE ARE HOPING TO SEE SOME
MOVEMENT ON THAT AS WELL AND
HOPEFULLY WE&apos;LL BE ABLE TO
REPORT BACK IN MAY THAT THAT
THESE PROCESSES ARE A LITTLE
BIT LESS ONEROUS.
&gt;&gt; ANY OTHER THOUGHTS ABOUT
COMPLETE REVIEW AND SO WE CAN
NOW TAKE PUBLIC COMMENT IF
THERE&apos;S ANYONE HERE WHO WOULD
LIKE TO MAKE A PUBLIC COMMENT
?
&gt;&gt; HELLO SIR.
I MISSED THE BEGINNING OF THE
MEETING.
MAYBE YOU WENT OVER SOME
OF THIS BUT I AM CONCERNED AS
YOU ARE THAT YOU I SEE ME STILL
DO NOT HAVE THE TRAFFIC STOP
DATA YOU&apos;VE BEEN ASKING FOR AT
COUNCIL MEETINGS AND SO I JUST
I THINK THAT&apos;S RIDICULOUS.
THE ONLY EXPLANATION I CAN
THINK OF IS THAT THE POLICE ARE
HIDING SOMETHING OR SPENDING
TIME.
AS FOR MARIJUANA EXCISE MONEY
BEING USED FOR DIVERSION, I
REALLY DO NOT LIKE WHAT I HEAR
HEARD ABOUT DIVERSION LIKE
HONESTLY I THINK WE SHOULD JUST
RELEASE PEOPLE THAT ARE IN
PRISON RIGHT NOW THAT HAD DRUG
THESE TYPES OF DRUG CHARGES
AGAINST THEM THAT&apos;S NOW LEGAL
AND THEN GIVE THEM MONEY
DIRECTLY THAT JUST SEEMS LIKE
SOMETHING THIS COUNTRY IS GOING
TO BE LIKE.
NO, THAT&apos;S ACTUALLY IMPOSSIBLE.
SO BUT I THINK THAT LOGICALLY
SEEMS THE BEST USE OF THE MONEY
FOR ME AND AS FAR AS UNARMED
CRISIS OR OH ONE MORE THING
ABOUT THE DIVERSION I ACTUALLY
WAS A BENEFICIARY OF A
DIVERSION PROGRAM WHEN I WAS IN
COLLEGE I WAS ON MY
ROLLERBLADES.
I WENT AND DINING HALL AND GET
SOMETHING TO EAT THE BOTTOM.
MY ROLLERBLADE HIT A GLASS DOOR
,CRACKED IT AND THIS IS LIKE
MONTHS LATER CAMPUS POLICE CAME
WHILE I WAS EATING WITH MY
FRIENDS, TOOK ME OUT AWAY FROM
THEM, TOOK ME DOWN THE SIDE
STAIRWELL, PUSHED ME UP AGAINST
THE WALL, CUFFED ME AND TOOK ME
TO THE CAMPUS POLICE STATION.
SO THAT IS WHAT PEOPLE GO
THROUGH BEFORE THEY GET TO A
DIVERSION PROGRAM AND THIS WAS
LATER I WAS SO SCARED I TELL MY
PARENTS I DIDN&apos;T REALLY EVEN
HAVE A STABLE MAILING ADDRESS
SO I WASN&apos;T GETTING ALL THE
COURT NOTICES AND LIKE THE NEXT
SEMESTER THE CAMPUS POLICE
ARRESTED ME PURPOSEFUL LIKE
RIGHT BEFORE FINALS WEEK AND I
SPENT A NIGHT IN CITY JAIL SO I
JUST IS SOME MONEY FOR A
DIVERSION ACTUALLY BEING GIVEN
TO THE JUDICIARY SYSTEM BECAUSE
PEOPLE ARE STILL UNDER A THREAT
LIKE OH YOU&apos;RE NOT GOING TO
JAIL BUT I MEAN ATTORNEY SLY
WAS TALKING ABOUT LIKE YEAH,
THEY&apos;RE NOT FORCED TO DO YOU
KNOW WHAT AND IT&apos;S LIKE WELL
YOU&apos;RE UNDER THREAT IF YOU
DON&apos;T COMPLETE THE PROGRAM, GO
TO JAIL.
SO NOW THIS IS KIND OF LONG
WINDED BUT I HOPE I MADE SOME
SENSE.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU FOR HAVING A
RESPONSE JUST TO CLARIFY THINGS
SO WE HAVE TRAFFIC STOP DATA
FOR TWENTY SEVENTEEN EIGHTEEN
NINETEEN TWENTY TWENTY THAT&apos;S
CURRENTLY BEING ANALYZED.
WHAT WE WERE ASKING IS THAT ALL
TRAFFIC STOP DATA GOING FORWARD
BE AVAILABLE AND OPEN TO THE
PUBLIC AND THAT&apos;S WHAT WE ARE
HOPING.
THAT&apos;S WHAT WE ARE ASKING
COUNSEL TO DO ASKING COUNSEL TO
COMPEL THE POLICE DEPARTMENT TO
MAKE THAT DATA PUBLIC SO THAT
ANYBODY COULD SEE AT ANY TIME.
SO WE EVENTUALLY GOT THE DATA
SETS THAT WE WERE ASKING FOR.
YOU PROBABLY HEARD ME YOU KNOW
,FOSSICK ABOUT THAT AND WE
EVENTUALLY GOT THOSE DATA SETS
THAT ARE WORKING WITH THE SMART
GROUP AT EASTERN MICHIGAN
UNIVERSITY, SOUTHEAST MICHIGAN.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M GOING TO GET THEIR NAME
WRONG EVERY TIME BUT THEY HAVE
A CRIMINAL JUSTICE PROGRAM
THERE THAT WE HAVE BEEN USING
THEIR RESEARCHERS.
THEY HAVE BEEN WORKING WITH US
TO DO THAT.
IT&apos;S CALLED THE SOUTHEAST
MICHIGAN CRIMINAL JUSTICE
POLICY RESEARCH PROJECT.
AND SO WE ARE IN THE PROCESS
OF ANALYZING DATA WE&apos;VE BEEN
WORKING FOR A YEAR ON WHAT BEST
ANALYSIS TO USE AND TALKING TO
OTHER STATISTICIANS, PEOPLE WHO
DID THE MICHIGAN STATE POLICE
STUDY TALKING TO MICHIGAN STATE
POLICE.
WE HAD THEIR LIEUTENANT COLONEL
CRAMM HERE AND HE TALKED ABOUT
THE VALUE OF MAKING THAT KIND
OF INFORMATION PUBLIC.
AND SO WE THINK THAT BY THE END
OF THE SUMMER WE&apos;LL START BEING
ABLE TO RELEASE SOME
INFORMATION THAT WE FOUND FROM
THOSE THOSE YEARS WE&apos;RE LOOKING
AT 17, 18 AND 19 SINCE 2010.
HE IS THE FIRST COVID YEAR
PEOPLE DROVE REALLY DIFFERENTLY
AND SO IT&apos;S WEIRD.
SO ANALYZE THAT ONE SEPARATELY
BUT SO WE&apos;RE ON OUR WAY TO
DOING THAT AND WE&apos;VE ACTUALLY
BEEN WORKING ON IT FOR A REALLY
LONG TIME SINCE THE FALL WITH
KEVIN KARPIAK WHO&apos;S OVER AT
EASTERN MICHIGAN UNIVERSITY.
BUT WHAT WE&apos;RE ASKING FOR NOW
IS THAT THOSE DATA SETS JUST BE
MADE PUBLIC ALL THE TIME.
AND I WOULD ARGUE THAT THE THE
DATA BELONG TO THE PEOPLE WHO
WERE STOPPED AS MUCH AS THEY DO
ANY CITY DEPARTMENT AND THERE
ARE LOTS OF MUNICIPAL ENTITIES
WHERE THAT&apos;S HAPPENED AND YOU
HAVEN&apos;T SEEN ANY MASS UPRISINGS
OR ANYTHING.
NOTHING TERRIBLE HAS HAPPENED
WHEN THE DATA ARE PUBLIC.
SO THAT&apos;S WHAT WE&apos;RE ASKING FOR
.
I JUST WANT TO CLARIFY OH NO
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
OF COURSE YOU&apos;RE ALL YOU&apos;RE
DOING.
OF COURSE.
THANK YOU.
ANYBODY ON THE PHONE BECAUSE
YOU WANT HIS NAME?
&gt;&gt; DID YOU WANT TO STATE YOUR
NAME?
MY NAME IS ZACHARY.
THANK YOU.
DON&apos;T HAVE A TELEPHONE?
&gt;&gt; NO.
OK IS THERE THEN ANYTHING ELSE
ANY OTHER COMMENT THAT YOU ALL
WANT TO MAKE OR IS THERE A
MOTION TO ADJOURN MOTION TO
ADJOURN.
IS THERE A SECOND SOMETHING ALL
IN FAVOR?
&gt;&gt; UH ANY OPPOSED.
&gt;&gt; WE ARE ADJOURNED.
THANK YOU GUYS.
&gt;&gt; I KNOW I SOUND TERRIBLE